Patrick Henry College 

Patrick Henry College (PHC) is a private established human sciences non-denominational Christian school that shows Classical Liberal Arts, Government, Strategic Intelligence in National Security, Economics and Business Analytics, History, Journalism, and Literature situated in Purcellville, Virginia. The school is known for its moderate Christian center, achievement in Moot Court, and graduate school acknowledgment rate. PHC is certify by the Transnational Association of Christian Colleges and Schools, a national confidence related authorizing association. 

Patrick Henry College was fused in 1998 by Michael Farris, originator and administrator of the leading body of the Home School Legal Defense Association, with which PHC is still firmly associated. It authoritatively opened September 20, 2000, with a class of 92 understudies. The school shuns government budgetary guide and is thusly mitigated from United States Department of Education revealing necessities on statistic cosmetics and other data. The school does not request race on applications. 

PHC gets the majority of its subsidizing from educational cost charges or gifts. The school expresses that it doesn't acknowledge any cash from the legislature or whatever other source that incorporates terms that override the expert of its Board of Trustees or strife with its fundamental explanations. PHC includes new offices and projects just as assets are accessible. 

Patrick Henry College got accreditation in 2007 from the Transnational Association of Christian Colleges and Schools, a national certifying association for Christian universities, colleges, and theological schools made by the Institute for Creation Research. The College had recently been denied accreditation by the American Academy for Liberal Education in the spring of 2002 in light of the fact that creationism was a piece of the educational modules. On June 30, 2005, the school was formally perceived by the United States Department of Education as a foundation qualified for DOE programs. It additionally enabled understudies to utilize more grants and allows and made contributors and understudies qualified for different tax reductions. On April 3, 2012, the Transnational Association of Christian Colleges and Schools reaffirmed Patrick Henry College's accreditation for a time of ten years. 

All understudies must sign an "Announcement of Faith" before they enlist, asserting confidence in what the school considers center Christian principles. For instance, understudies are approached to recognize "Satan exists as an individual, pernicious being who goes about as seducer and informer, for whom Hell, the spot of interminable discipline, was readied, where all beyond words of Christ will be limited in cognizant torment for time everlasting... Man is commonly corrupt and is inalienably needing salvation, which is solely found by confidence alone in Jesus Christ and His shed blood... Christ's demise gives substitutionary penance to our wrongdoings." The school pronounces non-denominational Christian convictions, educated by Evangelical Protestantism. 

Encouraging staff should likewise sign the Statement of Faith and an increasingly itemized Statement of Biblical Worldview, which speaks to the school's necessities for what ought to be educated. For instance, the "Scriptural Worldview Applications" expresses, "Any science, Bible, or different courses at PHC managing creation will show creation from the comprehension of Scripture that God's imaginative work, as portrayed in Genesis 1:1–31, was finished in six twenty-four-hour days." 

In 2006, PHC originator Farris remarked that the school held the view that its confidence was the main genuine confidence ("we trust that there is truth and there is mistake") and communicated objection to religious and social toleration. "Resilience can't exist together with freedom" in light of the fact that "the horde of resistance needs to boycott discourse." 

On April 12, 2007, LGBT rights bunch Soulforce chose PHC as one of the objectives of its yearly "Uniformity Ride," to dissent the position of preservationist Christian universities concerning homosexuality. In the same way as other Christian schools, Patrick Henry did not permit Soulforce to enter the college premises, yet the school proposed for understudy delegates to participate in a formal discussion at a nonpartisan area on the benefits of the proposed Federal Marriage Amendment to the US Constitution. Soulforce coordinators declined and informed the school of their purpose to enter the grounds to talk legitimately with understudies. Subsequent to being declined section, Soulforce framed a picket line outside the passage to the grounds and dissented for around five hours. 

Patrick Henry College is situated in the town of Purcellville in rustic northern Virginia, roughly northwest of Washington D.C. The grounds at present comprises of seven structures organized around a maintenance lake prominently called "Lake Bob", just as a few athletic fields. The most seasoned structure, Founders Hall, opened in 2000 and contains three study halls, the school library, and different managerial and personnel workplaces. It is likewise home to the workplaces of the Home School Legal Defense Association. Hanna Rosin, creator of "God's Harvard", depicted the grounds as "minor, less like an Ivy League school than like a Hollywood arrangement of an old Ivy League school." The structures are of Colonial Revival design. The work of art in Founders Hall comprises of duplicates of representations of the Founding Fathers set along a staircase, prompting an image of Patrick Henry at the second Virginia show which includes a light from paradise managing Henry's discourse. The craftsmanship is intended to, in the expressions of Hanna Rosin, "remind the understudies that America was established as a Christian country." 

The school's private town is made out of five living arrangement lobbies situated along the edges of the lake. There are two men's quarters (Oak Hill and Red Hill) and three ladies' residences (Mount Vernon, Monticello, and Montpelier). The four littler quarters opened in 2001, while the biggest living arrangement corridor, Red Hill, opened in 2003. Notwithstanding understudy lodging, Red Hill additionally contains three study halls and an office suite on its cellar level. Situated in the storm cellar of Mount Vernon is an amphitheater alluded to as Town Hall, where the school's day by day house of prayer sessions and other unique occasions are held. The living arrangement lobbies are set up in a circular segment shape around the lake. 

In August 2009 the school opened a $32 million, understudy life focus, which fundamentally extended eating, study hall, recreational, and athletic offices. Development started in December 2006 and was finished amid the late spring of 2009. On October 10, 2009 the school held a commitment function for the new structure which was gone to by roughly 1,000 individuals and highlighted fervent pioneer James Dobson of Focus on the Family as the keynote speaker. 

The school's author, Mike Farris, reported his renunciation as leader of the school on March 6, 2006, to progress toward becoming chancellor. Graham Walker, once in the past of Oklahoma Wesleyan University and the University of Pennsylvania, filled in as the second leader of the school, from 2006-2014. Jack Haye turned into the third President of Patrick Henry College in 2015 following thirty years in the financial world. 

On July 1, 2006, the teacher and social manager of "World", Gene Edward Veith, took the post of scholastic senior member. As a major aspect of various auxiliary and managerial changes actualized in November 2006, Veith was selected to the situation of executive and regulates the divisions of Academic Affairs and Student Life. 

Dr. Graham Walker declared his abdication as President of Patrick Henry College on October 15, 2014. Amid the pursuit procedure to choose another President, Provost Dr. Quality Edward Veith filled in as Interim President. On August 3, 2015, the College reported that Jack Haye had been chosen to fill in as the Third President of Patrick Henry College. Amid the period from Walker's renunciation through the mid year of 2016, numerous associations changes and redesigns occurred. In the Fall of 2016, the official authority of Patrick Henry College comprised of the Dean of Student Affairs, Dean of Academic Affairs, Director of Admissions and Communications, Vice President of Advancement, Vice President of Finance and Administration, and Vice President of Institutional Effectiveness and Planning. 

Understudies at the College can pick their major from inside seven fields of study. The Government Department offers studies Government, Journalism, Economics and Business Analytics, and Strategic Intelligence in National Security. The Government major gives an alternative to have practical experience in American Politics and Policy, International Politics and Policy, Political Theory, Strategic Intelligence, or a General Government track. The Classical Liberal Arts Department offer degrees in Classical Liberal Arts, History, and Literature and Minors in Biblical Studies, Classics, History, Journalism, Music, and Philosophy. 

On January 24, 2007, the school effectively finished an on location survey by a TRACS evaluation group, and was allowed full accreditation in April. 

In 2008, PHC's site recorded twenty-five full-time educators, of which twenty-one had no less than one doctorate; one teacher had a D.M.A., and another held an Ed.D. making it with the end goal that 24 of the 25 have a terminal degree in their field. In 2011, PHC additionally recorded 24 low maintenance staff, every one of whom have gotten a graduate degree or higher. Chancellor Emeritus Mike Farris has a J.D., has wrote a few books and studies of protected law, and has contended various cases before government and state high courts, just as the United States Supreme Court. 

In 2005, a library agent was compelled to leave for advancing that absolution is fundamental for salvation, thought about an infringement of the Statement of Faith. Further, in March 2006, five of the school's sixteen workforce members—Erik Root, Robert Stacey, Kevin Culberson, Todd Bates, and David Noe—resigned in dissent, saying that the President's understanding of the Biblical Worldview Policy limited scholastic opportunity. 

The renunciations prompted inquiries regarding the similarity of a solid aesthetic sciences training alongside its moderate scriptural convictions. David C. Noe, collaborator educator of Classics withdrew in the wake of finding that established works by non-Christian creators were now and then thought to be suspect at PHC, and there was an inexorably restricted perspective on Christianity. Root censured the totalitarian absence of workforce support in the thoughts and administering of the school, saying "if [PHC] proceeds down this street, will finish up being more an 'illiberal expressions instruction'." 

PHC has numerous principles of conduct run of the mill of preservationist, religious universities. Understudies might not engage in sexual relations outside of marriage, or use liquor or tobacco while under the specialist of the school, which is characterized as whenever amid a semester while selected, on or off grounds. People are not permitted in one another's apartments aside from amid open dormitory days, and underclassmen are liable to a time limitation. Guns are denied on grounds. The school has various conventions established in quarters life, including "bobtisms" — a portmanteau of Baptism and "Lake Bob", in which recently drawn in guys are dunked. 

During the 2000s Hanna Rosin, creator of "God's Harvard", said that "never would you discover a gathering of preferred acted young people over on the grounds of Patrick Henry." During that period numerous Patrick Henry understudies ridiculed Bob Jones University, which Rosin depicted as having "the best quality level of bad habit watch." Rosin remarked that "by a great many people's norms," Patrick Henry "was not a long ways behind" Bob Jones. 

Understudies are engaged with the network, and PHC requires its Government understudies to satisfy up to 24 credits of apprenticeship ventures, which incorporate temporary jobs, research and composing ventures, and extracurricular exercises, for example, debatable court, Model United Nations, and Mock Trial. Understudies right now fill in as assistants in a wide assortment of political associations, for example, the White House, an assortment of government offices, congressional workplaces and research organizations. Understudies are dynamic in nearby and national governmental issues, and individuals from the Patrick Henry College Republicans part frequently work with neighborhood political activity gatherings to campaign for preservationist issues at the administrative and state levels. Classes are dropped the day of the national races and the day preceding, with the goal that understudies may volunteer on political crusades; and numerous understudies go about as Student Action Team pioneers for Generation Joshua, driving gatherings of more often than not self-taught secondary school understudies volunteering on battles over the United States. 

Patrick Henry College contends as the Sentinels, handling groups in people's intercollegiate soccer and b-ball, and is an individual from the United States Collegiate Athletic Association (USCAA) and the Shenandoah-Chesapeake Conference. 

Since 2003, PHC's debatable court program has put in the main two spaces 14 out of 16 years and won multiple times in the National American Moot Court Association Competition. The American Moot Court Association positions them as number one in their "Top Programs in Intercollegiate Moot Court". In 2016, the group won the Nelson Mandela World Human Rights Moot Court Competition.