Sauganash Hotel 

Sauganash Hotel (initially Eagle Exchange Tavern) is a previous inn; viewed as the primary lodging in Chicago, Illinois. Worked in 1831, it was situated at Wolf Point in the present day Loop people group territory at the crossing point of the north, south and fundamental parts of the Chicago River. The area at West Lake Street and North Wacker Drive (once in the past Market Street) was assigned a Chicago Landmark on November 6, 2002. The inn changed owners regularly in its twenty-year presence and quickly filled in as Chicago's first theater. It was named after Sauganash, a translator in the British Indian Department. 

Imprint and Monique Beaubien, the proprietors and developers of the inn, were French Indian dealers. In 1826 they moved to Chicago on the exhortation of Mark's senior sibling Jean, a set up broker who lived alongside Fort Dearborn. The Beaubiens settled in a little lodge on Wolf's Point and furthermore exchanged with the Native Americans and different explorers to the developing settlement. They constructed a bar on the east bank of the south part of the Chicago River at the point where the north and south branches meet. 

The bar at first was named the Eagle Exchange Tavern. In 1831, they added an edge to the log structure to make Chicago's first lodging, the Sauganash Hotel. Whenever finished, it was one of just two private structures on the south side of the principle part of the Chicago River, the other being that of his sibling, Col. Jean B. Beaubien. The settlement had just twelve houses at the time. The hostelry quickly ended up well known, and when remade later turned into the city's biggest and best inn. Quickly nearby the lodging's open bar was Chicago's first medication store. 

The Greek Revival trim of the new inn appeared differently in relation to the next eleven structures of Chicago. The symmetry of its veneer was commonplace to contemporary Greek Revival rehearsed on the East Coast. Juliette Kinzie, who came to Chicago from Connecticut in 1831, portrayed it as "a pretentios white two-story working, with brilliant blue wood screens, the profound respect of all the little hover at Wolf Point". The hostelry's customer base rose above race, with locals and pilgrims appreciating each other's conversation. 

The progression of voyagers and pioneers heightened with the finish of the Black Hawk War in 1832. In 1833 the inn housed decision of the principal town trustees of the recently framed Town of Chicago. Beaubien kept the Hotel until 1834 and amid his proprietorship he routinely engaged visitors with his violin. On August 18, 1835, two years after the Potawatomi locals marked the settlement consenting to be moved to a booking past the Mississippi River in northwestern Missouri, they chose 800 overcomes to play out their keep going war move march on a way that go before the lodging. 

In 1835, a Mr. Davis accepted control of the inn, which hence had a progression of owners. The structure quickly filled in as Chicago's first theater, and facilitated the primary Chicago Theater organization in November 1837 out of a surrendered lounge area. By 1839, it came back to support as an inn, yet was devastated by flame in 1851, and along these lines torn down. The Wigwam was worked in its place nine years after the fact. 

Billy Caldwell "Sauganash", who filled in as a mediator for the Indian Agents, was the honoree of the inn. Conceived in around 1780, "Sauganash" was half local american whose father was Colonel Caldwell, an Irish officer in the British Army positioned at Detroit; his mom was a Pottawatomi. He was educated at a Jesuit school in Detroit, where he learned English and French. Caldwell took in a few Indian tongues. Billy Caldwell's Indian Name was "Straight Tree", however he was known by "Sauganash", which means Englishman in the Potawatomi language. As a warrior, Sauganash was affected by Tecumseh until his demise in 1813, and he rose to the dimension of a Captain in the British Indian Department amid the War of 1812. 

In 1834 (three years before Chicago fused as a city), the inn facilitated the main expert open execution in Chicago at an expense of $.50 ($ today) for grown-ups and $.25 for kids. The show guaranteed a wide assortment of gifts including ventriloquism. In the accompanying two years, a few voyaging actors performed at the inn. In 1837, the Chicago Theater, which was the principal neighborhood theater organization, set up shop in the inn's relinquished lounge area. Co-directors Harry Isherwood and Alexander McKinzie acquired a beguilement permit for the organization from the city committee, and it started playing out an alternate charged demonstrate each night beginning in late October or early November for around about a month and a half. The plays included titles "The Idiot Witness, The Stranger", and "The Carpenter of Rouen". Generation of "The Stranger" occurred in the lounge area of the lodging. Following a six-week commitment, the organization went on visit until the accompanying spring, when it came back to an alternate nearby scene.