Kapil Dev as Indian national cricket mentor 

Kapil Dev was named the Indian national cricket mentor in September 1999 after the arrangement of Sachin Tendulkar as chief of the Indian group in August 1999. As a player, Kapil Dev captained the group to their first Cricket World Cup triumph in 1983. When he resigned in 1994, he was the most topped Indian Test player, the holder of record for the most elevated number of Test wickets (434) and had prior held the record for the most elevated number of wickets in ODIs also. Because of his certifications as player and chief, he was delegated as the mentor in front of colleague Kris Srikkanth. The group saw accomplishment in his first arrangement at home against New Zealand yet observed whitewash in the ensuing test arrangement against host voyage through Australia and guests South Africa, India's first home arrangement misfortune in 12 years. India's 3–2 success in the resulting ODI arrangement under new commander Sourav Ganguly will perpetually be associated with the cases of match-fixing against South Africa's skipper Hansie Cronje. 

As the match-fixing embarrassment took centrestage, previous player Manoj Prabhakar blamed Kapil Dev for endeavoring to influence him in 1994 amid a competition in Sri Lanka. Under extreme weight from government officials and fans, Kapil Dev surrendered as mentor in September 2000, in the wake of having gone through short of what one year as the group mentor. The reports of CBI (India's chief examining organization) and K. Madhavan (delegated by BCCI to research coordinate fixing charges) in November 2000 excused Kapil Dev of any association in match-fixing. India's execution in the instructing spell of Kapil Dev was worse than average, winning only one Test coordinate (out of 8 played) and 9 ODIs (out of 25 played). 

Kapil Dev was designated mentor of the Indian national cricket group in 1999 succeeding Anshuman Gaekwad. His arrangement concurred with the second term of captaincy for Tendulkar. Kapil's first worldwide challenge as India's mentor began gravely with the group bowled out for 83 full scale against the meeting New Zealand group in Mohali. Because of a motivated bowling show by Javagal Srinath, the lead was confined to 132 pursues New Zealand were expelled for 215. India's batsmen bobbed back in the second innings with an aggregate of 505 with all the best five batsmen passing fifty and Rahul Dravid and Tendulkar scoring hundreds of years. Anil Kumble's ten-wicket coordinate pull at Kanpur empowered India to win the second Test coordinate. The Third Test finished in a draw, with Tendulkar chronicle his first twofold century in Test Cricket. In the resulting ODI Series, India won 3–2 and the feature for Indian group was a world record ODI organization of 331 keeps running among Dravid and Tendulkar in the second match at Hyderabad. The arrangement against New Zealand would be Kapil's best arrangement as national mentor. 

India pursued the NZ visit with a trek to Australia. India lost the Test arrangement 3–0 and the edge of thrashing was substantial in every one of these matches – 285 runs, 180 runs, innings and 141 runs. The feature of the Test arrangement came in the last Test when V. V. S. Laxman scored 167 at a run a ball in blurring light at the Sydney Cricket Ground and wanted much applause from the media. India's ODI arrangement execution coordinated the Test arrangement in disappointment as India figured out how to win only one match against Pakistan and Kapil needed to turn out with regards to his group. 

India had not lost a home test arrangement since 1987 (against Pakistan) and when South Africa visited India in February – March 2000, that streak was finished as India lost the home arrangement 2–0. Anyway occasions outside the field dominated the cricket: Before beginning of the arrangement, Tendulkar reported his choice to give up the captaincy after the Test matches, Azharuddin and Mongia were reviewed to the group, discussion emerged over Azharuddin's damage prompting his prohibition from the First Test. Ganguly was made the chief of the Indian group for the one-day arrangement. Talks in the media about no chance however 'UP' were not unwarranted when India took a 2–0 lead in the ODI Series and completing the arrangement at 3–2, after South Africa won the last two matches. It was found out later that South Africa's chief Cronje was engaged with wagering and there were endeavors to pay off South African players by Cronje and bookmakers. Toward the finish of the arrangement, the media felt that Ganguly's frame of mind and captaincy was gladdening. In March 2000, India took an interest in a triangular arrangement with South Africa and Pakistan. India won just a solitary one of their four matches and missed the finals. 

As the 1999/00 cricket season was slowing down, the Delhi Police stunned the cricket world when they declared that Cronje was associated with a "Cricket Match-fixing and Betting Racket". The UCBSA discharged short articulations denying the charges setting off a political line. At the point when Delhi Police started mounting proof, Cronje confessed to tolerating cash for discarding diversions in a telephone call with UCBSA's central Ali Bacher. Cronje was sacked and supplanted by Shaun Pollock. 

Previous Indian player Prabhakar likewise freely guaranteed that Kapil needed to discard a match against Pakistan. Prabhakar's claims against an obscure colleague was not new as he made these charges to a magazine "The Outlook" in 1997 dependent on which BCCI founded the Chandrachud Inquiry, a one man commission headed by resigned Chief Justice of India Yeshwant Vishnu Chandrachud. Prabhakar did not uncover names or give proof of his charges (coordinate fixing and telephone tapping claim on then cricket administrator Ajit Wadekar). At the point when the match fixing contention reemerged in 2000, BCCI discharged the Chandrachud Report to the media. The response of the Indian open brought about PILs and International Cricket Council and the BCCI were called to react in the Delhi and Calcutta High Courts. In light of the emergency, the Indian government started a CBI request on 28 April 2000. Previous BCCI President Inderjit Singh Bindra uncovered on 4 May 2000 that Prabhakar disclosed to him that Kapil requested that he discard the match. Amid the following trades between different gatherings, Kapil Dev separated in a meeting on BBC's Hard Talk with Karan Thapar. 

Kapil at first did not leave or disappear from nonattendance, from his instructing obligations. As the weeks advanced and as open discontent mounting on inaction in the match-fixing embarrassment and in no little measure the weight from the then Union Sport Minister Shukdev Singh Dhindsa, Kapil Dev left his situation of Indian Cricket Coach on 12 September 2000 vowing goodbye to the round of cricket. 

After broad examination and meetings, the CBI presented its report to Union Sports Minister on 1 November 2000. The report found that there was 

"no dependable proof" against Kapil. The BCCI's enemy of defilement officer K Madhavan (previous Joint Director of CBI) presented his report on 28 November 2000 in which he explained on players who were found to have joins with the match-fixing syndicate. Madhavan reasoned that Kapil did not endeavor to pay off Prabhakar and none of the players supported with Prabhakar's adaptation of the occasions. 

Kapil's term as Indian cricket group's national mentor was not viewed as a triumph because of poor on-field exhibitions. Amid Kapil's rule as National Coach, India performed seriously in away matches and oversaw only 3 triumphs in 15 recreations (20%) in ODI Tournaments. In Test cricket, India lost its first home arrangement in 13 years and oversaw only 1 triumph in 3 Test arrangement.