Suavemente 

Suavemente () is the presentation studio collection by American merenguero recording craftsman Elvis Crespo. Discharged by Sony Music Latin on April 14, 1998, the collection promoted merengue music and built up Crespo as a main craftsman in the Latin music showcase. He teamed up with a few lyricists and record makers to make a generally tropical music-enhanced account. 

With sentimental numbers and uptempo tunes, "Suavemente" got positive audits from music faultfinders who found the chronicle to contain fiery and appealing tracks. The collection was industrially fruitful; it turned into the main merengue recording to crest at number one on the United States "Announcement" Top Latin Albums graph. "Suavemente" crested at number 106 on the US "Bulletin" 200 graph. Two of its singles, "Suavemente" and "Tu Sonrisa", topped the US "Board" Hot Latin Songs diagram; Crespo was perceived as turning into the principal craftsman to have put two merengue singles at number one. "Suavemente" was Crespo's business achievement, acquainting him with the famous music showcase with the Spanglish remix of its title track. 

The collection got a few honors, including "Board" Latin Music Awards for Album of the Year and New Artist Album of the Year and a designation for the Grammy Award for Best Tropical Performance. It won five Lo Nuestro Awards, including Tropical Album of the Year. The account has been ensured platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA), and has sold more than 1.5 million duplicates around the world. Its title tune remains a staple at Latin music dance club and celebrations, while "Suavemente" has been positioned among the most fundamental Latin collections of the previous 50 years by "Announcement" magazine. 

In 1993, siblings Hăšctor and Oscar Serrano shaped Grupo Mană­a in Puerto Rico. They enrolled Alfred Cotto, Reynaldo Santiago, and Elvis Crespo to visit and record two-advance merengue music, promoting the class to a more youthful group of onlookers. In 1996, Crespo left Grupo Mană­a and marked with Sony Music Latin (the organization which marked his previous band), starting his performance vocation. He said in a May 1999 "Announcement" meet that leaving the band was "an extremely hard choice", since they functioned admirably together. While Crespo was stating "Suavemente", he started singing the tune and found that his child "burned through throughout the evening singing it". This drove him to record the track, since he thought "[it] would be a hit". Crespo initially expected for "Suavemente" and "Tu Sonrisa", the singles which brought him global acknowledgment, to be recorded with Grupo Mană­a. 

The collection was discharged in the United States on April 14, 1998. "Suavemente" and American merengue artist Manny Manuel's collection, "Es Mi Tiempo", expanded US tropical-music deals by 27 percent over the earlier year. On November 28, the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) confirmed "Suavemente" gold for shipments of 500,000 duplicates, the main merengue record guaranteed gold. The collection was confirmed gold in Chile, platinum in Venezuela, and platinum in Central America. Amid the 1998 Christmas season, "Suavemente" was among the top-selling Latin collections in the United States. On February 20, 1999, Sony Discos president Oscar Llord communicated an enthusiasm for advancing "Suavemente" in Latin America and Europe since he trusted that the collection would sell more than one million duplicates. In May, it sold 1,500,000 duplicates around the world. "Suavemente" has sold more than 879,000 duplicates in the US, making it the eleventh top of the line Latin collection in the nation as per Nielsen SoundScan. 

Crespo performed at the 23rd New York Salsa Festival at Madison Square Garden on September 5, 1998 with El Gran Combo de Puerto Rico, and Latin jazz recording craftsman Eddie Palmieri. He was a piece of the Hot Latin Nights appear at Walt Disney World's Pleasure Island on September 19, which was communicated as a two-section Telemundo uncommon on December 14 and 31. On October 11 Crespo (performing with other Latin acts) sang "Suavemente" on the seven-hour "Puerto Rico Se Levanta", an advantage show communicate live on Telemundo which raised $13 million for casualties of Hurricane Georges on Hispaniola. He performed "Suavemente" at the 1999 "Announcement" Latin Music Awards. Crespo's appearance was applauded by "Bulletin" John Lannert, who trusted that it foreshadowed conceivable strength at future music grants. He showed up at El Concierto Del Amor, a yearly tropical-music celebration held at the Continental Airlines Arena in East Rutherford, New Jersey on February 14, 1999, with individual salsa artists Jerry Rivera, Frankie Negron, Tito Nieves, and Michael Stuart. To advance "Suavemente" Crespo visited Uruguay, Argentina, Chile, Colombia, and Peru in the principal quarter of the year, and he performed at "Billboard"s tenth yearly Latin Music meeting on April 20, 1999. 

In "Board", Latin music benefactor John Lannert considered the collection a "merengue-bomba circle" and Crespo a "midtempo pop/merengue" craftsman. In his 2003 book, "The Latin Beat", Ed Morales portrayed the title tune as a "salsa exemplary or pop hit." True wrongdoing writer M. William Phelps called "Suavemente" a "sentimental Latin song" in his 2008 book, "I'll Be Watching You". In her 2005 book, "Popular Culture Latin America", Lisa Shaw called "Suavemente" "a case of the absolute best merengue with a stone pop stable." According to "Batanga" magazine, "Suavemente" is "inebriating, hot, unadulterated sabroso merengue. Sizzle in the mid year boulevards to the quick paced beats, ear busting horns and percussive stamina"; "Latina" magazine noticed the collection's "hot beat". Spanish-language magazine "Vistazo" called Crespo the new vibe of merengue music, and his collection a most loved of audience members who appreciate pachanga. 

Sony Music International Latin America president Frank Welzer called Crespo a "virtuoso" who stated "infectious fan-satisfying" melodies. 

Terry Jenkins of AllMusic commended the collection's "enticing Latin songs" and found the central method of the account to be nostalgic, solid, energetic, and swinging. Business Wire noticed its notoriety in the American and Latino markets. The "Los Angeles Times" called "Suavemente" and Crespo's collection "vitality stuffed". "Announcement" Lannert composed that other Latin acts endeavored to imitate Crespo's style. 

"Suavemente" appeared at number six on the US "Announcement" Top Latin Albums graph for the week closure May 2, 1998. In its second week the collection rose to number five, selling 3,000 duplicates. "Suavemente" was number three on the diagram for the week completion May 16, selling 5,000 duplicates (a 60-percent expansion). The next week the collection rose to number two, behind Selena's "Compilation" box set, and sold 7,000 duplicates. The business increment set "Suavemente" at number 188 on the US "Bulletin" 200 outline, just the second merengue collection to make that graph. In its fifth week, collection deals fell 50 percent and it dropped to number eight. The next week (which incorporated the Memorial Day weekend), "Suavemente" climbed to number six. For the week finishing June 13, the collection reappeared the "Announcement" 200 graph at number 170 and crested at number one on the Top Latin Albums diagram. The following week it dropped to number three and 197 on the Top Latin Albums and "Announcement" 200 diagrams, individually. "Suavemente" sold 6,000 duplicates for the week finishing June 13, ascending to number two on the Top Latin Albums diagram behind Ricky Martin's "Vuelve". The collection dropped to third the next week. "Suavemente" sold 6,000 duplicates the following week, ascending to number two behind "Vuelve". Following five weeks behind "Vuelve", "Suavemente" passed it on the Top Latin Albums graph when its deals expanded 16 percent to 8,600 duplicates. For the seven day stretch of August 8, 1998, it fell back to number two behind "Vuelve". Following three weeks of declining deals, "Suavemente" was number three when it sold 5,000 duplicates as "Tu Sonrisa" (its second single) beat the Hot Latin Songs outline. It finished 1998 as the year's eighth-top of the line Latin collection. "Suavemente" burned through 98 back to back a long time in the main 10 of the Top Latin Albums outline, the second-longest keep running ever. 

The collection stayed on the US Tropical Albums outline for seven successive weeks after its discharge. It started sliding down the diagram, yet stayed close to the top. "Suavemente" came back to the highest point of the Tropical Albums diagram following twelve weeks behind the "Hit the dance floor with Me" . The next week it sold 4,000 duplicates, staying at number one. In the collection's fourth back to back week on the outline, it sold 6,500 duplicates. Amid its fifth straight week on the Tropical Albums graph, it sold 6,000 duplicates, down 16 percent. "Suavemente" finished 1998 as the fourth-top of the line tropical-music collection. In its ninth back to back week on the Tropical Albums outline the collection sold 7,000 duplicates, down 17 percent from the earlier week. The next week, its tenth successive at number one, it sold 7,500 duplicates (up seven percent). For the week finishing February 6, 1999, in spite of the fact that offers of "Suavemente" plunged 13 percent to 6,500 duplicates the collection stayed on the graph. On the February 27, 1999 outline, collection deals expanded by 67 percent. The next week deals diminished 30 percent to 7,000 duplicates, however "Suavemente" stayed on the Tropical Albums outline for its fourteenth straight week. 

The collection appeared at number 43 on the US "Bulletin" Heatseekers Albums diagram for the week consummation May 2, 1998; the next week, it rose to number 39. For the week closure May 16, the collection bounced to number 13; the next week, it rose to number nine. In consequent weeks, the collection kept on ascending the diagram; for the week finishing June 13, it was number five. 

After "Suavemente" appeared at number 15 on the US "Board" Hot Latin Songs diagram for the week finishing April 25, 1998, the magazine's John Lannert anticipated that Crespo could "without much of a stretch win another craftsman grant" in 1999. "Announcement" music examiner Karl Ross called the collection's title melody "a sultry [track] about the intensity of a kiss". For the week closure May 16 "Suavemente" crested at number one, uprooting "Una Fan Enamorada" by Servando y Florentino. Crespo turned into the main merengue recording craftsman with a main single on the Hot Latin Songs diagram since Dominican artist Juan Luis Guerra's "El Costo De la Vida" six years sooner. "Suavemente" stayed at number one with 13 million gathering of people impressions, a four-percent expansion over the earlier week. The tune broke the record for most weeks at number one for a tropical-music recording on the Hot Latin Songs outline (six) since "Board" started checking Latin airplay in 1986, and it was number one on the Tropical Songs diagram for nine successive weeks. "Suavemente" finished 1998 as the year's best tropical single. Sony Discos president Oscar Llord delineated for "Announcement" about the "watchfulness" of traverse into the English-language showcase, calling the lead single a procedure done "normally" because of two US radio stations (in Miami and New) York mentioning a Spanglish adaptation. On musicianguide.com, Timothy Borden composed that the melody's Spanglish variant had "startling hybrid intrigue". The bilingual form was discharged in Germany in the second quarter of 1999. "Suavemente" turned into Crespo's most-prevalent melody and a "young hymn" in the Latino people group. It was the first Sony Music Latin discharge to make a big appearance on the U.S. "Board" Hot 100 graph, topping at number 84. 

The collection's second single, "Tu Sonrisa", was circulated to US radio stations in the second seven day stretch of July 1998. It appeared at number 21 on the U.S. Hot Latin Tracks outline, as "Suavemente" stayed in the main five. The tune topped at number one on the Tropical Songs graph, Crespo's second number one. "Tu Sonrisa" topped the Hot Latin Tracks graph in its 6th week, the artist's second number one on that outline. It uprooted "Te Quiero Tanto" by Mexican Latin pop gathering Onda Vaselina, and Crespo turned into the principal merengue craftsman with two number-one Hot Latin Tracks singles. Following seven days at number one, "Tu Sonrisa" was uprooted by Gloria Estefan's "Oye!". After seven days it again bested the outline for multi week before being dislodged by "Perdido Sin Ti", Martin's fourth single from "Vuelve". After the achievement of "Suavementes bilingual rendition, Sony Music conveyed a club blend of "Tu Sonrisa" to radio stations in February 1999. "Announcement" Latin music supporter Leila Cobo called the tune "appealing" and (with "Suavemente") "powerful". "Tu Sonrisa" is the fifteenth-best Sony Discos single on the Hot Latin Tracks diagram since the graph was built up in 1999. 

"Luna Llena", "Suavemente" third single, appeared and crested at number 29 on the Hot Latin Tracks diagram for the week finishing December 12, 1998. It dropped off the diagram following seven days before graphing on Hot Latin Tracks and Tropical Songs at 33 and 13, individually, for the week finishing January 16, 1999. The melody topped at 26 and 11 on the Hot Latin Songs and Tropical Songs graphs, individually. The fourth and last single from the collection, "Nuestra Cancion", was less fruitful; it crested at number 17 on the Tropical Songs graph in 1999. 

"Suavemente" is considered to have altered merengue music, making it a prevalent subgenre of Latin music, and the collection brought Crespo universal acknowledgment in the merengue advertise. The vocalist is the principal merengue craftsman with a collection on the US Top Latin Albums diagram, and two number-one tunes on the US Hot Latin Songs outline. "Announcement" refered to Crespo and American vocalist performing artist Carlos Ponce as kicking off the US showcase with their collections. As indicated by "Bulletin" Karl Ross, Crespo rose above the US Latino market and his prosperity may have been felt in Europe and the Pacific Rim. Sony Discos president Oscar Llord called "Suavemente" the "best introduction collection of a Tropical craftsman ever." "Suavemente" was recorded as the third best-diagramming and - selling Sony Discos collection amid the Top Latin Albums twenty-fifth year in 1999. Crespo was positioned fifth on the Hot Latin Songwriters in 1998, eleventh on the Top Latin Albums Artists, seventh on the Hot Latin Tracks Artists, fourth on the Top Tropical Album Artists, and second on the Tropical Tracks Artists records. "Suavemente" has been named a standout amongst the most basic Latin collections of the previous 50 years by "Board", and its title melody turned into a staple in Latin-music clubs. The lead single likewise turned into a mainstream tune in Mexico, where it was utilized in celebrations around the nation. 

At the 1999 "Board" Latin Music Awards Crespo got four selections (counting Album of the Year and Hot Latin Track of the Year), tying him with Selena for the most designations in a solitary year; the record was later broken by Tito El Bambino, with 18 assignments in 2010. He won New Artist Album of the Year and Latin Dance Maxi-Single of the Year. Crespo was the Latin 50 Artist of the Year at the 2000 "Announcement" Latin Music Awards (the top-offering Latin craftsman from January 1999 to January 2000). He was assigned for the Grammy Award for Best Tropical Latin Performance in 1999, losing to Marc Anthony's "Contra la Corriente". At the eleventh Premio Lo Nuestros, Crespo got six assignments and won five honors: Tropical Album of the Year, Tropical Song of the Year, Tropical Male Artist of the Year, Tropical-Salsa Duo or Group of the Year (imparted to Milly Quezada), and Tropical New Artist of the Year. 

Adjusted from AllMusic. 

Vocals 

Performers 

Generation 

Plan 

!scope="row"|Venezuela 

!scope="row"|Platinum 

!scope="row"|10,000 

!scope="row"|Central America 

!scope="row"|Platinum 

!scope="row"|