St Thomas the Martyr's Church, Oxford 

St Thomas the Martyr's is a Church of England area church of the Anglo-Catholic convention, in Oxford, England, close Oxford railroad station in Osney. It is situated between Becket Street toward the west and Hollybush Row toward the east, with St Thomas Street inverse. 

The congregation was established in the twelfth century, committed to St Thomas Becket. The structure still holds a portion of its unique design, albeit considerable extensions and fixes have been made, especially in the seventeenth century (under the curacy of Robert Burton) and in the nineteenth century. 

The congregation assumed a critical job in the beginning periods of the Oxford Movement, being the site of day by day benefits just as such ritualist rehearses as special stepped area candles and the wearing of Eucharistic vestments. The pioneers of the Movement lectured at the congregation, and the early Tractarians were intently connected with St Thomas's. 

It has customarily been held in Osney that the congregation was established in the rule of Stephen, however this is probably not going to be valid, as Thomas Becket was not martyred until exactly fifteen years after Stephen's passing. It is realized that during the 1180s, the site was allowed to the standards of the close-by Osney Abbey, and a church was raised on the site around 1190. From the mid-thirteenth century the Osney territory was alluded to as the ward of St Thomas', however it remained ostensibly a house of prayer of the monastery until the disintegration of the Monasteries under Henry VIII, when it was set under Christ Church, Oxford. Christ Church regarded it as a regular area church with a clergyman, and from the mid-nineteenth century the officeholder was styled a vicar. 

After the curacy was put under the support of Christ Church, the occupants were for the most part researchers or individuals from the school; from 1616 to 1640 the curacy was held by Robert Burton, creator of "The Anatomy of Melancholy", who amplified the congregation. In the English Civil War the medieval recolored glass in the congregation was wrecked, incompletely because of the vandalism of Parliamentarian troops caught at Cirencester in 1642 and detained in the congregation. Following the Restoration the holders of the curacy changed quickly, frequently staying in the situation for just a couple of years on end. From something like 1713 Christ Church rented a house in High Street to area trustees and the benefits were utilized for fixing the congregation. This proceeded until 1923, when the house was sold. 

By the mid nineteenth century, the congregation and its area were appearing of disregard. In 1802 just ten communicants are recorded, and in 1814 some 90% of the area was believed to be non-churchgoing. The area was additionally decreased by the formation of the areas of St Paul's in 1837, St Barnabas' in 1869, and St Frideswide's in 1873. 

The clergyman from 1823 to 1842, one John Jones, got a huge turnaround participation; maybe the most irregular development was a houseboat – the "Boatmans' Floating Chapel" – obtained in 1839, for use as a church serving the families dealing with the stream and the Oxford Canal. This vessel was St Thomas' first church of simplicity; it was given by H. Ward, a nearby coal shipper, and utilized until it sank in 1868. It was supplanted by a house of prayer committed to St Nicholas that stayed being used until 1892. A second house of prayer was worked in 1860, committed to St Frideswide, later supplanted by the new ward church of St Frideswide's, which assumed the area of New Osney in 1873. 

Real fixes were done start in 1825. The floor-level was raised above flood-level, an entire three feet. The rooftop was remade, the south divider was reconstructed utilizing the first materials, and the primary highlights of the twelfth century chancel curve were disposed of. 

The vicar from 1842 to 1892 was Thomas Chamberlain (later originator of St Edward's School), a firm adherent to the Tractarian development, who presented day by day benefits just as such ritualist rehearses as raised area candles and the wearing of Eucharistic vestments – the last making him be reprimanded by Bishop Wilberforce in 1855. Huge numbers of the pioneers of the Oxford Movement, including Edward Bouverie Pusey, Henry Parry Liddon, John Mason Neale, Charles Fuge Lowder and Edward King lectured at the congregation. In the beginning of the development, Anglo-Catholicism was intently connected with St Thomas'. In 1847 Chamberlain established the Community of St Thomas Martyr, which was given to the help of the poor of the area, at this point intensely slumland; this sisterhood stayed dynamic until 1958. The community structures for it were worked in 1886, however have since been devastated. In 1846 the north walkway and vestry were wrecked and another passageway of five narrows with a vestry at its west end was worked in its place. The blocked pinnacle curve and two blocked windows in the chancel were opened and another chancel curve was constructed. 

The vicar from 1896 to 1908 was T.H. Birley, later Bishop of Zanzibar. In 1897 the structure was again re-roofed and a vestry worked against the north mass of the pinnacle. St Thomas' was proclaimed an antiquated ward in 1948. 

In September 2015 the area was joined with the neighboring ward of St Barnabas, Oxford, to frame the new ward of St Barnabas and St Paul, with St Thomas the Martyr, Oxford. St Barnabas is the area church and St Thomas is the house of prayer of straightforwardness. The main vicar of the new area was Fr Jonathan Beswick. In 2019, he was prevailing by Fr Christopher Woods. 

The congregation has a nave with a north walkway and vestry, a Perpendicular Gothic west pinnacle, a chancel and a south patio. The nave was remade in the late fifteenth or mid sixteenth century to meet a pinnacle of around a similar age; usually dated to 1521, however seems, by all accounts, to be based on more seasoned establishments. The southern side of the nave contains what are most likely thirteenth-century supports and a couple of Perpendicular Gothic windows. The north path was initially worked in the thirteenth century, and remade by H.J. Underwood in 1890; the vestry was worked in the seventeenth century and modified in 1846 to plans by Chamberlain, through the liberality of the clergyman, Alexander Penrose Forbes. The congregation has been reroofed something like twice, in 1825 and 1897. 

The chancel, which has a roof enriched by C. E. Kempe, has three windows in the style of the late twelfth century, and a cleric's entryway incorporated with the south side "around" 1250. A south patio was worked in 1621 at the command of Dr Robert Burton, whose arms are cut in the peak over the date. A candle holder given by Ann Kendall in 1705 hangs in the chancel. The chancel roof was enriched with an example of gold stars on a blue foundation in 1914. After two years, a special stepped area was raised at the east end of the north walkway, and an aumbry set in the north mass of the chancel. The illustrious arms of William IV are shown in the pinnacle. 

St Thomas' congregation has been a Grade II recorded structure since 1954. 

The churchyard contains Combe House, a 1702 structure initially worked as a school, just as a vicarage planned in 1893 by C. C. Rolfe. The remaining parts of a prior Rolfe building, the 1886 Sisterhood of St Thomas, are likewise present; in 1974, these added up to a solitary bungalow and a formed block door.