No Exit (Miami Vice) 

"'No Exit" is the seventh scene of the main period of the American police procedural TV arrangement "Miami Vice". It debuted on the National Broadcasting Company (NBC) on November 9, 1984. The scene was composed by Charles R. Leinenweber and Maurice Hurley, and coordinated by David Soul. "No Exit" included visitor appearances by Bruce Willis, Katherine Borowitz and Vinnie Curto. 

"Miami Vice" centers around the lives of two covert Metro-Dade cops, James "Sonny" Crockett (Don Johnson) and Ricardo Tubbs (Philip Michael Thomas). In this scene, the criminologists examine an arms seller selling military equipment. The seller's maltreatment of his companion convolutes the observation. 

Composed under the working title "Three-Eyed Turtle", the scene has been viewed as investigating existentialist topics, including Jean-Paul Sartre's hypothesis that all connections depend on a battle for predominance. The scene includes a contemporary pop soundtrack, utilizing Phil Collins' "I Don't Care Anymore" and "Remain With Me" by Teddy Pendergrass. 

Metro-Dade criminologists James "Sonny" Crockett (Don Johnson) and Ricardo Tubbs (Philip Michael Thomas), and lieutenant Martin Castillo (Edward James Olmos) are covert to capture a couple of arms sellers. After a concise shoot-out, the vendors are arrested, and over the span of their admissions, uncover their provider to take care of business named Tony Amato. 

Amato (Bruce Willis) is a universal arms seller who the Federal Bureau of Investigation have been following, as they trust Amato is arranging the clearance of FIM-92 Stinger rockets stolen from a military arms warehouse. The FBI consents to permit Metro-Dade to direct the reconnaissance as its hardware was set up first. Crockett and Tubbs watch Amato's harsh association with his better half Rita (Katherine Borowitz). At the point when Rita endeavors to employ an assassin to slaughter Amato, Crockett blocks the call and meets with her, masterminding her assistance for their situation as a byproduct of her wellbeing. She clarifies that she has attempted to leave Amato previously, however he contracted hooligans to assault her separation legal advisor's better half to terrify her into spot. 

Amato's imminent purchaser is captured and captured. The FBI had at first wanted to send one of their specialists covert in his place, however Tubbs volunteers for the job, dreading the operator is excessively unpracticed. Tubbs meets with Amato and his colleagues, who exhibit one of the Stingers and disclose how to take out a non military personnel plane with an unarmed rocket. Tubbs consents to buy the majority of Amato's stock and organizes another meet to make the purchase. That night, Crockett, surveilling Amato's home, sees him beat Rita once more, and is unfit to intercede. 

At the point when Amato breaks his phone in a fierceness, he discovers one of the reconnaissance gadgets. Tubbs rapidly calls him, professing to have been bothered also, and the two orchestrate to move the purchase to that night. Amato is observably anxious amid the meet, and is frantic to empty the rockets. The purchase is set to occur at the docks, and the rest of the Metro-Dade team of police touch base with government operators to finish the bust, arresting Amato securely. 

Be that as it may, when Amato is expected to be summoned the following morning, a gathering of government operators land with administrative work offering him insusceptibility from indictment in return for working for them to supply South American enemy of Communist gatherings. Rita touches base to see Amato going free, draws a weapon from her purse, and shoots him. 

"No Exit" was initially given the working title "Three-Eyed Turtle", which was changed when an official at the National Broadcasting Company (NBC's) Standards and Practices office understood this was slang for a sexual demonstration. The corrected title, "No Exit", has been seen by commentators Steven Sanders and Eon Skoble as a source of perspective to Jean-Paul Sartre's 1944 play "No Exit", as the scene includes "an early arrangement commitment with existentialism". The pair have contended that the cracked connection among Tony and Rita Amato echoes the savant's affirmation that every single human relationship are characterized by a battle for control and matchless quality. 

"No Exit" was coordinated by David Soul, whose "Starsky and Hutch" co-star Paul Michael Glaser had additionally coordinated for the arrangement. Author Maurice Hurley would get composing credits on various other "Miami Vice" scenes, including "The Dutch Oven", "Whatever Works", and "Brilliant Triangle". The area utilized for Amato's house was the "Pink House", a moniker for the Spear House in Coral Gables, Florida; a 1978 structure planned by design firm Arquitectonica. The area was picked for use in the scene by official maker Michael Mann. Visitor star Bruce Willis was one of various New York organize on-screen characters cast in the arrangement, having just showed up in an Off-Broadway exhibition of "Trick for Love" before being given a role as Tony Amato. Fighter Vinnie Curto was given a role as a guardian to Willis' character. 

As was standard for scenes of "Miami Vice" scenes, "No Exit" utilizes contemporary popular music in its soundtrack, including the tunes "Remain With Me" by Teddy Pendergrass and "I Don't Care Anymore" by Phil Collins. The last melody highlighted in a scene of Crockett driving around evening time, reverberating the utilization of Collins' "In the Air Tonight" in a comparative scene in the pilot, "Sibling's Keeper". The distance examined in "I Don't Care Anymore" has been portrayed as reflecting the brutal break in Amato's marriage, and furthermore the separation with which Crockett must approach this part of the case. 

"No Exit" was first communicated on NBC on November 9, 1984. NBC rehashed the scene twice in 1985, preceding airing it yet again in 1986. 

Composing for DVD Talk, Todd Douglass Jr. portrayed "No Exit" as being "certainly one of the features" of "Miami Vice" first season. Douglass felt that the scene's tight concentrate left it "one of the additionally engaging" portions of the arrangement. "No Exit" has been viewed as a "defining moment" for "Miami Vice", settling what might turn into the general tone of the arrangement. This has been credited to the expansion of Edward James Olmos to the cast, and Mann turning into the sole official maker after the flight of Anthony Yerkovich. The scene has likewise been noted for instance of the arrangement's analysis of the administration of Ronald Reagan, connecting the lowlife Amato with United States intercession in South America. This investigate of the government and its treatment of outside intercession would turn out to be a common component of the arrangement, including in the second season scene "Intemperate Son" and the fourth season scene "Balls of Death". 

Willis' depiction of Amato has been portrayed by faultfinder Mark T. Conard for instance of a common character prime example in the arrangement, that of a harried male with a checkered past. Different models given by Conard are Bruce McGill's visitor job in "Out Where the Busses Don't Run" and G. Gordon Liddy's appearance in "Stone's War". Conard likewise distinguishes the three male protagonists—Crockett, Tubbs and Castillo—among this model.