Elizabeth F. Ellet 

Elizabeth Fries Lummis Ellet (October 18, 1818 – June 3, 1877) was an American author, antiquarian and writer. She was the main essayist to record the lives of ladies who added to the American Revolutionary War. 

Conceived Elizabeth Fries Lummis, in New York, she distributed her first book, "Sonnets, Translated and Original", in 1835. She wedded the physicist William Henry Ellet and the couple moved to South Carolina. She had distributed a few books and added to numerous diaries. In 1845 she moved back to New York and had her spot in the abstract scene there. She was included with an open outrage including Edgar Allan Poe and Frances Sargent Osgood and, later, another including Rufus Wilmot Griswold. Ellet's most critical work, "The Women of the American Revolution", was distributed in 1845. The three volume book profiled the lives of energetic ladies in the early history of the United States. She kept composition until her passing in 1877. 

Elizabeth Fries Lummis was conceived in Sodus Point, New York, on October 18, 1818. Her mom was Sarah Maxwell 

(1780–1849) the little girl of American Revolutionary War commander John Maxwell. Amid the Revolution, John Maxwell was lieutenant of the principal organization brought up in Sussex County, New Jersey. He was elevated to skipper and appended to the Second Regiment Hunterdon County Militia. He was likewise a skipper in Colonel Spencer's regiment of the Continental Army from February 7, 1777, to April 11, 1778. He later joined the military of General George Washington as skipper of an organization of 100 volunteers known as Maxwell's Company. 

Her dad was William Nixon Lummis (1775–1833), a noticeable doctor who examined drug in Philadelphia under the celebrated Dr. Benjamin Rush. In the early piece of 1800, Dr. Lummis left Philadelphia and acquired the Pulteney domain in Sodus Point, Wayne County, New York. Elizabeth Lummis went to Aurora Female Seminary in Aurora, New York, where she contemplated, among different subjects, French, German and Italian. Her originally distributed work, at age 16, was an interpretation of Silvio Pellico's "Euphemio of Messina". 

In 1835, Elizabeth Lummis distributed her first book, entitled "Lyrics, Translated and Original", which incorporated her disaster, "Teresa Contarini", in light of the historical backdrop of Venice, that was effectively performed in New York and different urban areas. Around this time she wedded William Henry Ellet (1806–1859), a physicist from New York City. The couple moved to Columbia, South Carolina, when he was made educator of science, mineralogy and geography at South Carolina College in 1836. 

Amid this time Ellet distributed a few books. In 1839 she expressed "The Characters of Schiller", a basic exposition on the essayist Friedrich Schiller including her interpretation of a significant number of his sonnets. She expressed "Scenes in the Life of Joanna of Sicily", a past filled with the ways of life of female honorability, and "Drifts about the Country", an enthusiastic portrayal of the view she had seen in her movements through the United States, in 1840. She kept composition ballads, interpretations and expositions on European writing which she added to the "American Monthly", the "North American Review", the "Southern Literary Messenger", the "Southern Quarterly Review" and different periodicals. Ellet composed richly in a wide assortment of classes. 

In 1845, Ellet left her significant other in the south, moving back to New York City where she continued her place as an individual from artistic culture alongside such scholars as Margaret Fuller, Anne Lynch Botta, Edgar Allan Poe, Rufus Wilmot Griswold, Anna Cora Mowatt and Frances Sargent Osgood. 

Amid this time, Ellet was a member in a famous embarrassment including Edgar Allan Poe and Frances Sargent Osgood, both of whom were hitched to other people. Records of the points of interest of the outrage and the grouping of occasions vary. At the time, Poe was at the tallness of his popularity, on account of his work "The Raven". Various ladies in artistic culture sent him letters, including Ellet and Osgood. A portion of the letters sent may have been coy or desirous ones. Ellet additionally invested energy with Poe talking about artistic issues. It is conceivable that Ellet felt herself in rivalry with Osgood for Poe's affections. Amid this time, Poe had composed a few sonnets to and about Osgood, including "A Valentine". 

On one visit to Poe's home in January 1846, Ellet supposedly watched letters from Osgood, appeared to her by Poe's better half Virginia, and in this way exhorted Osgood to request their arrival, suggesting to Osgood that they were a rashness. For Osgood, Margaret Fuller and Anne Lynch Botta requested that Poe return the letters. Poe, irritated by their obstruction, recommended that Ellet would do well to "take care of her "own" letters". One such letter, written in German, requested that Poe "call for it at her living arrangement tonight", an expression apparently intended to be tempting, however Poe either disregarded it or did not comprehend its significance. He at that point got together these letters from Ellet and left them at her home. In spite of her letters having been returned, Ellet asked her sibling "to "request of me the letters"". Her sibling, Colonel William Lummis, did not trust that Poe had just returned them and taken steps to slaughter him. So as to shield himself, Poe mentioned a gun from Thomas Dunn English, who did not trust that Ellet at any point sent Poe any letters. 

Osgood's better half, Samuel Stillman Osgood, took steps to sue Ellet except if she formally apologized. She withdrew her announcements in a letter to Osgood saying, "The letter appeared by Mrs Poe "probably been a phony" made by Poe himself". She put all the fault on Poe, proposing the occurrence was on the grounds that Poe was "excessive and subject to demonstrations of lunacy." The talk that Poe was crazy was spread by Ellet and by different adversaries of Poe and in the end announced in papers. After Osgood rejoined with her better half, the outrage faded away. Poe's wiped out spouse Virginia, be that as it may, was profoundly influenced by the outrage. As ahead of schedule as July 1845 she had been accepting unknown letters, perhaps from Ellet, which revealed her significant other's supposed careless activities. On her deathbed, Virginia asserted "Mrs. E. had been her killer." As Poe portrayed years after the fact, "I despised Mrs. E essentially on the grounds that she revolted me, and right up 'til the present time she has never stopped her "mysterious" mistreatments." It is trusted that Poe composed the short story "Bounce Frog" as an artistic vengeance on Ellet and others. 

Around 1846, Ellet started a noteworthy venture in authentic composition: to profile the biographies of ladies who relinquished for, and were focused on, the American Revolution. She did this via looking out unpublished letters and journals, and by meeting relatives of Revolutionary time and wilderness ladies, turning into the primary history specialist of the Revolution to complete such an exertion. She noticed the "bounty of materials for the [masculine] history of activity" and endeavored to include balance by telling the ladylike side, alluding to the establishing "moms" as giving "sustain in the household asylum of that affection for common freedom which thereafter fueled into a fire and shed light on the world". 

She found such a great amount of data about female nationalists that the principal version of "The Women of the American Revolution" (1848) must be distributed in two volumes. These volumes were generally welcomed, and a third volume of extra material was distributed in 1850. Later history specialists think about these volumes to speak to her most imperative work. Ellet additionally created "Residential History of the American Revolution" outlining a similar material in account structure and furthermore distributed in 1850. 

Ellet recounted to the accounts of ladies from each settlement and from all positions of society, except for African Americans, whose job she disregarded. A portion of the ladies she expounded on, for example, Martha Washington, Abigail Adams, Mercy Otis Warren and Ann Eliza Bleecker, among others, were well known in their own right. She likewise composed of the ladies who were increasingly dark however similarly profitable: the spouses of legends who, even with British infringement, valiantly brought up youngsters and guarded their homes. She expressed, "It is practically unthinkable presently to welcome the tremendous impact of lady's enthusiasm upon the predeterminations of the newborn child republic." 

Anthologist and pundit Rufus Wilmot Griswold had supported Ellet in the creation of the book and allowed her entrance to the records of the New-York Historical Society, of which he was a part. She didn't recognize his help, irritated the malicious Griswold. In an audit, Griswold stated, "with the help of a couple men of their word more comfortable than herself with our open and local experience, she has made a profitable and fascinating work." 

Presently a set up and regarded writer, Ellet proceeded to state "Family Pictures from the Bible" in 1849. In 1850 she expressed "Nighttimes at Woodlawn", an accumulation of German legends and customs, and "Household History of the American Revolution", potentially the main history of the American Revolution told from the point of view of the two people. From 1851 to 1857 she expressed "Watching Spirits", "Pioneer Women of the West", "Novelettes of the Musicians" and "Summer Rambles in the West". This book was roused by a sailing trip along the Minnesota River in 1852. The neighborhood town, Eden Prairie, Minnesota, got its name from Ellet and has devoted a nature trail in her respect. 

In 1857, Ellet distributed a 600-page reference book of American home financial aspects entitled "The Practical Housekeeper". The guide, which appeared to target center to high society perusers, was sorted out into three sections: cooking, housekeeping and pharmaceutical concerns. Its substance included a large number of formulas and counsel with references to savants, researchers, and antiquated civic establishments. There were likewise five hundred wood-engraved outlines. She wrote in the prelude, "No total arrangement of Domestic Economy, inside the breaking points of a helpful manual, has been distributed in this nation." 

Later works included "Ladies Artists in All Ages and Countries" (1859), the principal book of its sort to speak to a past filled with ladies craftsmen. She wrote"The Queens of American Society" (1867), and "Court Circles of the Republic" (1869), a gander at the public activity of eighteen presidents from George Washington to Ulysses S. Give. 

In 1850, Ellet and her better half migrated to New York, where he spent his last a very long time as a concoction specialist for the Manhattan Gas Company. 

Ellet wound up included with the separation case between Rufus Griswold and his second spouse, Charlotte Myers, in 1852. Ellet and Ann S. Stephens kept in touch with Myers advising her not to permit the separation, just as to Harriet McCrillis, who planned to wed Griswold after the separation, to end her association with him. After it was in truth, Ellet and Stephens kept composition to Myers and induced her to cancel the separation on September 23, 1853. On February 24, 1856, the intrigue went to court, with Ellet and Stephens giving protracted declaration against Griswold's character. Neither Griswold nor Myers visited and the intrigue was expelled. At the point when Griswold kicked the bucket in 1857, Sarah Anna Lewis, a companion and author, proposed that Ellet had compounded Griswold's disease and that she "urged Griswold to his demise". 

In 1857 Ellet supplanted Ann Stephens as abstract manager of the New York "Night Express". Ellet's better half passed on two years after the fact in 1859. She kept on composing, and in spite of the fact that they had no kids, she advanced foundations for devastated ladies and youngsters by talking out in the open to raise reserves. An Episcopalian the vast majority of her life, she changed over to Catholicism in her later years. She passed on of Bright's infection in New York City on June 3, 1877, and was covered next to her significant other at Green-Wood Cemetery in Brooklyn. 

Ellet was the main history specialist to expound on the relationship of ladies to the American Revolution. She felt that ladies formed history by their impact, which was done through "assumption" and "feeling". This was so difficult to characterize that she expressed "History can do it no Justice". Her book "The Women of the American Revolution" is as yet examined. 

Rundown of works taken from MSU Historic American undertaking.