Dormir Contigo 

"Dormir Contigo" () is a tune composed by Armando Manzanero and created and performed by Mexican artist Luis Miguel. The tune is a pop ditty in which the hero communicates the delight of laying down with his accomplice. It was discharged as the third single from the collection "Amarte Es un Placer" in January 2000. The track crested at number 11 "Board" Hot Latin Songs graph in the United States and number two on the Latin Pop Songs diagram. 

"Dormir Contigo" got positive surveys from music commentators who believe it to be a standout amongst the best tracks on the collection. Manzanero got a BMI Latin Award for the track in 2000. A limited time music video for "Dormir Contigo" was discharged and includes Miguel playing out the tune live amid the main leg of his Amarte Es Un Placer Tour in 1999. 

In 1997, Luis Miguel discharged his twelfth studio collection "Sentiments", the third record in his "Sentiment" arrangement on which he covers exemplary Latin American boleros. It sold over 4.5 million duplicates and won the Grammy Award for Best Latin Pop Performance in 1998. To advance "Sentiments", he left on a voyage through the United States, Latin America, and Spain enduring over a year. By 1998, Miguel was viewed as the most prominent Latin craftsman universally and his collections had sold more than 35 million duplicates around the world. Miguel started an association with American vocalist Mariah Carey the next year. Following a nonattendance of two years on the music scene, Miguel declared on 19 July 1999 that he would discharge another collection by September. He said the up and coming collection would be an arrival to pop chronicles rather than the bolero spread forms he had recorded on the "Sentiment" arrangement. He denied bits of gossip that he was intending to record a two part harmony with Carey. The collection's last title, "Amarte Es un Placer" was reported on 17 August 1999. 

Miguel affirmed that it was the main collection where he was increasingly engaged with the tracks' organization. Notwithstanding Miguel co-composing a few of the record's tracks, he was helped by different writers including Armando Manzanero, Juan Carlos Calderăłn, and Arturo Perez. Recording occurred at the A&M Studios, Cello Studios, Ocean Way Recording, Watersound, and the Record Plant in Hollywood, California with Miguel taking care of the preparations himself. 

"Dormir Contigo" is a "pop anthem" made by Manzanero. In the verses, the hero portrays the delight of laying down with his darling. As per Manzanero, it is one of his two main tunes that he has made for Miguel (the other being "Por Debajo de la Mesa"). It was discharged as the third single from "Amarte Es un Placer" in January 2000. Miguel played out the tune live amid the principal leg of his Amarte Es Un Placer Tour in 1999. Miguel's execution of the tune amid the visit was discharged as a limited time music video. 

Leila Cobo of the "Miami Herald" called "Dormir Contigo" "lovely" and referenced that it has "a portion of the couple of significant verses" on "Amarte Es un Placer". "The Dallas Morning News" editorial manager Mario Tarradell respected "Dormir Contigo" as one of the "arousing and grave anthems" on the collection. Essentially, John Lannert of "Bulletin" magazine believed the track to be one of the "pair of moving sentimental numbers" (the other being "Soy Yo" which Manzanero likewise created). Richard Torres of "Newsday" refered to the melody as a standout amongst the best tracks on the record. The track was perceived as a standout amongst the best performing Latin melodies of the year at the BMI Latin Awards in 2002. 

In the United States, "Dormir Contigo" appeared at number 16 on the "Bulletin" Hot Latin Songs graph on the seven day stretch of 1 January 2000. It crested at number 11 five weeks after the fact. The track additionally crested at number two on the Latin Pop Songs diagram (the main position was held by Ricardo Arjona's melody "Desnuda"). 

Credits adjusted from the "Amarte Es un Placer" liner notes.