Thomas Quiney 

Thomas Quiney (purified through water 26 February 1589 – c. 1662 or 1663) was the spouse of William Shakespeare's little girl Judith Shakespeare, and a vintner and tobacconist in Stratford-upon-Avon. Quiney held a few metropolitan workplaces in the company of Stratford-upon-Avon, the most astounding being chamberlain in 1621 and 1622, but at the same time was fined for different minor offenses. 

In 1616, Quiney wedded Judith Shakespeare. The marriage occurred amid a season when an extraordinary permit was required by the congregation, and the couple had neglected to get one, prompting Quiney's concise banning. Quiney was likewise brought under the steady gaze of the Bawdy Court less than two months after the wedding to answer charges of "licentious lovemaking" with a Margaret Wheeler, who kicked the bucket in labor. Researchers trust that because of these occasions William Shakespeare adjusted his will to support his other little girl, Susanna Hall, and avoided Quiney from his legacy. 

Judith and Thomas had three kids: Shakespeare, Richard, and Thomas. Shakespeare Quiney kicked the bucket at a half year of age, and neither Richard nor Thomas lived beyond 21. The passing of Judith's last youngster prompted legitimate wrangling over William Shakespeare's will that went on until 1652. Researchers hypothesize that Thomas Quiney may have kicked the bucket in 1662 or 1663 when the internment records are deficient. 

Thomas Quiney was conceived in Stratford-upon-Avon and absolved on 26 February 1589 in Holy Trinity Church. He was the child of Richard and Elizabeth Quiney. He had 10 kin, among them a Richard Quiney who was a merchant in London, Mary Quiney who later wedded Richard Watts, the vicar of Harbury, and Elizabeth Quiney who wedded William Chandler. There is no record of Thomas Quiney's participation at the nearby school, yet he had adequate instruction to compose short sections in French, maintain a business, and hold a few civil workplaces throughout his life. 

Quiney was a vintner and managed in tobacco. He held the rent to a house known as "Atwood's" to run a bar, and later exchanged houses with his brother by marriage, William Chandler, for the bigger house known as "The Cage" where he set up his vintner's shop in the upper half. He is recorded as pitching wine to the partnership of Stratford-upon-Avon as late as 1650. 

He was a man of some training, with learning of French and calligraphy. In marking his records for 1621 and 1622 as chamberlain he finished them with a couplet in French from a sentiment by Mellin de Saint-Gelais. Quiney composes ""Bien heureux est celui qui pour devenir sage, Qui pour le mal d'autrui fait child apprentissage"" however the first is ""Heureux celui qui pour devenir sage, Du mal d'autrui fait child apprentissage"". The first converts into English as ""Happy is he who to turned out to be insightful, serves his apprenticeship from other men's inconveniences"" yet Quiney's form "‶ is ungrammatical and without sense". 

He was a well-regarded man in the ward, and was chosen a burgess and constable in Stratford-upon-Avon in 1617. In 1621 and 1662 he was acting Chamberlain. In marking his records for 1622–3, he did as such "with twists", however the records demonstrate that the board casted a ballot them "defective". Quiney did not go to this gathering, however he attended the later gathering where the records were passed, so they seem to have required further clarification. 

Quiney's notoriety was marginally spotted; he was fined for swearing and for "enduring townsmen to tipple in his home", and was at one point in peril of arraignment for "administering unwholesome and corrupted wine". 

On 10 February 1616, Thomas Quiney wedded Judith Shakespeare, William Shakespeare's girl, in Holy Trinity Church. The associate vicar, Richard Watts, who later wedded Quiney's sister Mary, most likely administered. The wedding occurred amid the Lenten season, which was precluded. In 1616 Lent began on 23 January, Septuagesima Sunday, and finished on 7 April, the Sunday after Easter. The marriage in this manner required an uncommon permit, issued by the Bishop of Worcester, which the couple had neglected to acquire. A Walter Wright of Stratford was refered to for wedding without either banns or permit, so since Quiney was refered to for wedding without the required permit it is assumed that they had posted banns in chapel. The infraction was a minor one, obviously brought about by the clergyman, as three different couples were additionally marry that February. Quiney was all things considered brought by Walter Nixon to show up under the watchful eye of the Consistory court in Worcester. (This equivalent Walter Nixon was later associated with a Star Chamber case and was discovered liable of fashioning marks and accepting kickbacks). Quiney neglected to show up by the required date. The register recorded the judgment, which was suspension, approximately 12 March 1616. It is obscure if Judith was additionally suspended, yet regardless the discipline did not keep going long. In November of that year they were back in chapel for the absolution of their firstborn tyke. 

The marriage did not start well: Quiney had as of late impregnated another lady, Margaret Wheeler, who was to kick the bucket in labor alongside the youngster and was covered on 15 March 1616. On 26 March 1616, Quiney showed up under the watchful eye of the Bawdy Court, which managed, in addition to other things, with "whoredom and uncleanliness". Admitting in open court to "animalistic relations" with Margaret Wheeler, he submitted himself for redress. He was condemned to open retribution "in a white sheet (as indicated by custom)" before the gathering on three Sundays. He likewise needed to admit to his wrongdoing, this time wearing normal garments, before the Minister of Bishopton in Warwickshire. The initial segment of the sentence was dispatched, basically giving him a chance to off with a five-peddling fine to be given to the area's poor. Since Bishopton just had a house of prayer, he was saved any open mortification. 

Where the Quineys lived in the wake of being hitched is obscure. Judith claimed her dad's bungalow on Chapel Lane, Stratford, while Thomas had held, since 1611, the rent on a bar called "Atwood's" on High Street. The cabin later go from Judith to her sister as a component of the settlement in their dad's will. In July 1616 Thomas swapped houses with his brother by marriage, William Chandler, moving his vintner's shop to the upper portion of a house at the side of High Street and Bridge Street. Known as "The Cage", it is the house generally connected with Judith Quiney. In the twentieth century The Cage was for a period a Wimpy eatery before being transformed into the Stratford Information Office. 

The Cage gives further knowledge into why Shakespeare would not have confided in Judith's better half. Around 1630 Quiney endeavored to sell the rent on the house however was counteracted by his family. In 1633, to secure the premiums of Judith and the youngsters, the rent was marked over to the trust of three relatives: John Hall, Susanna's significant other; Thomas Nash, the spouse of Judith's niece; and Richard Watts, vicar of adjacent Harbury, who was Quiney's brother by marriage and who had directed at Thomas and Judith's wedding. In the end, in November 1652, the rent to The Cage wound up in the hands of Thomas' oldest sibling, Richard Quiney, a merchant in London. 

The unfavorable beginnings of Judith's marriage, disregarding her better half and his family being generally unexceptionable, has prompted hypothesis this was the reason for William Shakespeare's hurriedly changed last will and confirmation. He previously gathered his legal counselor, Francis Collins, in January 1616. On 25 March he made further changes, presumably in light of the fact that he was kicking the bucket and in light of his worries about Quiney. In the main inheritance of the will there had been an arrangement ""vnto my sonne in L[aw]""; however "sonne in L[aw]" was then struck out, with Judith's name embedded in its stead. To this little girl he passed on ³100 ""in release of her marriage porcion""; another ³50 if she somehow happened to surrender the Chapel Lane bungalow; and, in the event that she or any of her kids were as yet alive toward the finish of three years following the date of the will, a further ³150, of which she was to get the intrigue however not the central. This cash was expressly denied to Thomas Quiney except if he were to offer on Judith grounds of equivalent esteem. In a different endowment, Judith was given ""my expansive silver plated bole"". 

At last, for the greater part of his domain, which incorporated his primary house, "New Place", his two houses on Henley Street and different grounds in and around Stratford, Shakespeare had set up an involve. His home was handed down, in dropping request of decision, to the accompanying: 1) his little girl, Susanna Hall; 2) upon Susanna's passing, ""to the first sonne of her bodie lawfullie yssueing and to the heires Males of the bodie of the saied first Sonne lawfullie yssueing""; 3) to Susanna's second child and his male beneficiaries; 4) to Susanna's third child and his male beneficiaries; 5) to Susanna's ""ffourth ... ffyfth sixte and Seaventh sonnes"" and their male beneficiaries; 6) to Elizabeth, Susanna and John Hall's firstborn, and her male beneficiaries; 7) to Judith and her male beneficiaries; or 8) to whatever beneficiaries the law would typically perceive. This detailed involve is normally taken to show that Thomas Quiney was not to be endowed with Shakespeare's legacy, albeit some have estimated that it might basically demonstrate that Susanna was the favored youngster. 

Judith and Thomas Quiney had three kids: Shakespeare (sanctified through water 23 November 1616 — covered 8 May 1617); Richard (submersed 9 February 1618 — covered 6 February 1639); and Thomas (absolved 23 January 1620 — covered 28 January 1639). Shakespeare was named for his mom's dad. Richard's name was regular among the Quineys: his other granddad and an uncle were both named Richard. 

Shakespeare Quiney kicked the bucket at a half year of age. Richard and Thomas Quiney were covered inside a month of one another; they were 19 and 21 years of age, separately. The passings of the majority of Judith's youngsters expedited new lawful outcomes. The involve on her dad's legacy drove Susanna, alongside her girl and child in-law, to make a settlement, by utilization of a fairly detailed legitimate gadget, for the legacy of her own part of the family. Lawful wrangling proceeded for an additional thirteen years, until 1652. 

Of Thomas Quiney's destiny the records show close to nothing. It is theorized that he may have kicked the bucket in 1662 or 1663 when the area entombment records are inadequate. He absolutely had a nephew in London, who at this point held the rent to The Cage.