Contra la Corriente (Marc Anthony collection) 

Contra la Corriente ("Against the Current") is the third studio collection discharged by American artist Marc Anthony on October 21, 1997 by RMM Records. The collection was created by Puerto Rican performer Angel "Cucco" Peăąa, with a large portion of the melodies composed by Panamanian author Omar Alfanno. The collection was generally welcomed by pundits who lauded the vocals of Anthony just as the tunes. The collection delivered six singles, four of which crested on the main ten on the Hot Latin Tracks graph. Advanced by a sold-out show in Madison Square Garden, "Contra la Corriente" turned into the main salsa collection achieve number one on the Top Latin Albums diagram and to graph on the "Board" 200. 

"Contra la Corriente" got a Grammy Award and a Latin Billboard Award, and was named the eighth best collection of 1997 by "Time" magazine. It has sold more than 400,000 duplicates starting at 2000. The collection got a gold confirmation for delivery of 500,000 duplicates in the United States. This was the last collection that Marc Anthony recorded under RMM Records before changing over to Columbia Records to record his first self-titled English collection. 

Since Anthony's marking on with RMM Records, his initial two collections had been effective, selling more than 600,000 duplicates joined. His second collection, "Todo a Su Tiempo", was ensured gold in the United States and got a Grammy Award assignment. Record maker Sergio George, who was credited for the achievement Anthony's prior collections, was not engaged with the creation of "Contra La Corriente". Heavenly attendant "Cucco" Peăąa, who has worked with salsa veterans, for example, Gilberto Santa Rosa and Willie Colăłn, took up the situation as maker for the collection. "Contra la Corriente", the third studio collection by Anthony, was discharged in October 1997. The collection was disseminated by MCA Records and was advanced at a sold-out show in Madison Square Garden days before the arrival of the collection. 

For the collection, Anthony constructed a studio close to his home. Around that time, he was associated with the generation of Paul Simon's melodic play "The Capeman" and needed to record the collection in three weeks. Anthony picked nine melodies out of 1,300 examples. He sent tapes to co-maker Peăąa at the Altamar Music Studios in San Juan, Puerto Rico to get input. He made routine flights between New York and Puerto Rico to record the collection hours and to practice for the play. Panamanian arranger Omar Alfanno, who composed three tunes on the last collection, had formed five melodies for the collection. Fernando Arias formed the boleros "No Me Conoces" and "Suceden". "Si Te Vas" is a front of the Pedro Fernăąndez melody. Manny Benito composed the last track, "Un Mal Sueăąo". 

"Y Hubo Alguien" ("And There Was Somebody") was the lead single from the collection. Discharged in a similar month as the collection, the single achieved number-one on the Hot Latin Tracks. It was his first number one single on the graph and the main single by a salsa artist to achieve number one. "Me Voy a Regalar" ("I Am Going to Give") pursued later in the year. "Si Te Vas" ("If You Go") was the third single from the collection, discharged in 1998; it achieved number-eight on Hot Latin Tracks. "Contra la Corriente" ("Against the Current") and "No Me Conoces" ("You Do Not Know Me") both achieved number-two on Hot Latin Tracks., "No Sabes Como Duele" ("You Do Not Know How It Hurts") was the last single to be discharged from the collection in 1999 and achieved number-eighteen on the Hot Latin Tracks. Three of the six singles, "Y Hubo Alguien", "Si Te Vas", and "Contra la Corriente", achieved number-one on the Latin Tropical Airplay outlines. Two melodies from the collection were made into music recordings. The main music video was the lead single "Y Hubo Alguien" which was taped in New York City. The second music video was "No Me Conoces" which was coordinated by Benny Coral. Recording occurred in Măšxico and highlighted Jennifer Lopez as the supporting on-screen character. 

"Contra la Corriente" got for the most part positive surveys from commentators, who adulated Marc Anthony's singing. Terry Jenkins of Allmusic gave the collection a 4.5 out of 5 and adulated Anthony's vocals as being "hot" and "close perfect" however he felt that it "doesn't exactly coordinate the confounding statures of his achievement "Todo a Su Tiempo"". Throbbing Obejas of the "Chicago Tribune" names "Contra la Corriente" as Anthony's best collection and felt that the impact of Cuban music was unmistakable "in the rhythms and harmonies" in contrast with Los Van. Ernesto Lechner of the "Los Angeles Times", who was progressively incredulous of the collection, gave it two-out-of-four stars condemning the courses of action as "agonizingly sudsy" and considered the collection an "imperfect magnum opus in the saccharine type of salsa romantica." An editorial manager for "Bulletin" magazine felt Anthony should "expand on his transcending notoriety with another radio-suitable bundle". "Contra la Corriente" was named the eighth best collection of 1997 by "Time" magazine expressing that "...whether you habla espanol or not, Anthony's ability gets through, no interpretation required". 

At the 41st Grammy Awards, "Contra la Corriente" was given a Grammy Award for Best Tropical Latin Performance. Lechner later said the collection was "poppish" and asserted it to "not measure facing the greater part of the contending endeavors in his class." "Bulletin" granted the collection "Tropical Album of the Year by a Male Artist", refering to that the collection turned into the most elevated selling salsa collection when it graphed the Billboard 200. It additionally got a selection for a tenth Lo Nuestro Awards for "Tropical Album of the Year". The single "Y Hubo Alguien" got a Billboard Latin Music Award and a Lo Nuestro grant for "Tropical Song of the Year". 

This would be the last time that Anthony worked with the RMM name. After debate with Ralph Mercado over business rehearses, he left the record mark and later marked on with Columbia Records to record his first self titled English collection. 

Amid the Madison Square Garden show, RMM official maker Ralph Mercado introduced an honor to Anthony for selling more than 350,000 duplicates just before discharge. "Contra la Corriente" was the discharged on October 21, 1997 in the United States. The collection appeared at number-one on the Top Latin Albums graph on the seven day stretch of November 22, 1997, and remained at number-one for three sequential weeks. The collection appeared at number-one on the Tropical Albums diagram and stayed on top for ten non-back to back weeks. "Contra la Corriente" was the main collection Anthony to diagram on the "Bulletin" 200, cresting at number seventy-four. The collection was the fourth top of the line Latin collection of 1998 and was the second top of the line tropical collection after "Buena Vista Social Club". The collection was ensured gold in the United States for delivery of 500,000 units. A remastered version of the collection was discharged on September 9, 2003 by Universal Music Latino. "Contra la Corriente" has sold more than 400,000 units starting at 2000. 

The accompanying credits are from Allmusic.