Wichita Linebacker 

"Wichita Linebacker" is the third scene of the third period of the American puzzle TV arrangement "Veronica Mars", and the forty-seventh scene by and large. Composed by Phil Klemmer and John Enbom and coordinated by Harry Winer, the scene debuted on The CW on October 17, 2006. 

The arrangement delineates the undertakings of Veronica Mars (Kristen Bell) as she manages life as an understudy while working two jobs as a private criminologist. In this scene, Veronica helps a football player, Kurt Fenstermacher (Armie Hammer) recover his stolen playbook. In the interim, Piz (Chris Lowell) gains a vocation at the school radio station, and Veronica meets Dean O'Dell (Ed Begley, Jr.) out of the blue after she gets in a bad position for occasions identified with the occasions that happened in the past scene, "My Big Fat Greek Rush Week". 

Phil Klemmer and John Enbom, the scholars of the scene, found the scene hard to compose on the grounds that they were not extremely acquainted with American football. Be that as it may, they chose to determine the issue by making the scene as meager about football as could be expected under the circumstances. "Wichita Linebacker" additionally includes a visitor appearance by Armie Hammer, just as the primary appearances by Begley, Jr. as Cyrus O'Dell and Ryan Devlin as Mercer Hayes. The scene got blended to negative audits, with analysis essentially concentrating working on it of the week. 

Veronica watches a football training before she communicates her disappointment with Logan (Jason Dohring). Afterward, she meets Weevil (Francis Capra), who is working at a vehicle wash. Veronica is called into the Dean O'Dell's office, and he undermines her with ejection in the event that she doesn't surrender a few names in connection to the sorority cannabis outrage. Piz calls Veronica in to help a football player, Kurt Fenstermacher, recover his playbook, with Kurt's sweetheart, Trish (Lindsey McKeon) paying for the examination. Veronica's solitary proposal is that he gets another one. Veronica persuades her dad, Keith Mars (Enrico Colantoni), to enlist Weevil as his new collaborator at Mars Investigations. While trying to print a playbook for Kurt, Veronica masks herself as a team promoter, however neglects to print one. Subsequent to being gotten back to into the Dean's office, Veronica is in the room amid a discussion between society young men and women's activists. Veronica returns to the football player, and she estimates that his girlfriend’s ex stole it. Weevil helps Keith at criminologist work, prevailing past Keith's desires. 

Veronica converses with the ex before discovering that the Kurt's closest companion is most likely liable. Veronica gets an irritating telephone call from Logan, so she tracks his mobile phone, discovering him betting. Veronica and Logan have a battle before she discovers that Keith needed to quit working for a customer when Weevil hit a suspect; Keith feels required to flame Weevil. Veronica discloses to Weevil the news before she gives him an occupation fixing the Dean’s vehicle. Veronica goes up against the closest companion, however he’s not the culprit, and Veronica all of a sudden understands that Trish is. Veronica misleads Trish about the end result for Kurt so as to evoke a genuine response from her; this arrangement works, and Veronica discovers that Trish took the playbook so as to get him off the group. In any case, she lost it simultaneously. Kurt, Trish, and Veronica track it down to the ex, who gave the plays to another group to show disdain toward the couple. 

Veronica goes to Dean O’Dell and requests a trade: Veronica discloses to him that his child shower painted his vehicle, and he will employ Weevil. Veronica converses with the betting proprietor, who acts peculiarly. Veronica tracks his vehicle before evacuating the tracker later. Veronica converses with Trish, who says that Kurt left for Kansas. Weevil begins his new activity as a Hearst janitor. Piz finds a new line of work on a grounds radio show, where he meets both the women's activists and the brotherhood young men. Amidst the show, the women's activists get a content that says that Claire, the young lady who the clique young men brought up, was assaulted. Veronica and Logan accommodate their relationship and kiss. 

The scene was composed by Phil Klemmer and John Enbom and coordinated by Harry Winer, checking both Klemmer and Enbom's eleventh composition credit, and Winer's third coordinating credit for the arrangement. Klemmer and Enbom at first felt that they would be unfit to compose the scene since they didn't know particularly about American football—so they attempted to make the scene less about football. Enbom expressed, "Loot simply kind of gave [the episode] down. I think whether you play severe consideration, you'll see it isn't as footbally as a scene about a football player could be. What's more, I imagine that is the reason." The scene did not have the monetary allowance to contract a full football crew, so a few scenes were without additional items, including when Veronica meets one of the football players and when she breaks into the storage space. 

The scene includes the primary appearance of Dean Cyrus O'Dell (Ed Begley, Jr.), a repetitive character for the third season. At first, Michael McKean was slated to play the job, however inside twelve hours of tolerating the part, McKean chose to pass on "Veronica Mars" by and large. Thomas called this "the most discouraging throwing news on the planet." Multi week later, Begley acknowledged the job. The two performing artists had as of late showed up in "A Mighty Wind". "Wichita Linebacker" likewise incorporates a visitor appearance by Armie Hammer, who plays Kurt Fenstermacher, the football player whose playbook is stolen. Ryan Devlin shows up as Mercer Hayes, a Hearst College understudy who might be indicted in the sequential assault case in the scene "Spit and Eggs". Regardless of having this job on "Veronica Mars", Devlin would proceed to play Duncan Kane, a job begun by Teddy Dunn before he left the show in "Doughnut Run", in the spinoff web arrangement "Play It Again, Dick". 

In its unique communicate, "Wichita Linebacker" got 3.12 million watchers, positioning 84th of 92 in the week by week rankings. This figure was a slight increment from the past scene, "My Big Fat Greek Rush Week", which was seen by 2.96 million watchers. 

"Wichita Linebacker" got blended to negative audits. Eric Goldman of IGN gave the scene a 7.0 out of 10, demonstrating that it was "great". In spite of this, he composed a blended audit, opining that "to the extent riddles go, this was a so-so one," that "the Hearst grounds attacker story simply doesn't appear to get the best possible weight it requires," and that "there's likewise some bizarre tonal issues presently." However, he lauded the arrival of Weevil. Rowan Kaiser, composing for "The A.V. Club", was likewise generally basic, while concentrating acclaim on Weevil's storyline. He alluded to "Wichita Linebacker" as "what I would expect were the show not all that aggressive. Here, Veronica won't Hearst College, she's going to Television College, where things that are school y occur." Television Without Pity gave the scene a "C+". "I don't believe it's in effect excessively cruel to state this was not one of this current show's more grounded or all the more energizing scenes. The composing was strangely level, in any case, and the tender loving care was crummy also." what's more, the commentator scrutinized the show's treatment of its connections. "That is something that is made this show incredible before - layering in unpredictable and imperative connections while not really being a relationship-focused show. I just expectation they run some place with the betting thing, in light of the fact that something else, as I would like to think, this scene will have been an absolute exercise in futility." 

Value Peterson of "TV.com" composed that while he "enjoyed it generally speaking", he disdained the attention on Logan and Weevil, composing that he was "more than prepared for Weevil to be discounted the show" and, "I'm getting marginally tired of [Logan's] storylines. He is by all accounts switching back and forth between poor me hangdog and sneaky brother liar. [‶] Logan isn't my top choice." On his blog What's Alan Watching, Alan Sepinwall composed that "this was a genuinely carefree hour, with the two darkest occasions - Weevil whipping the harsh sweetheart and the blonde getting assaulted - occurring off-screen. What's more, if the motivation behind doing shorter circular segments was to maintain a strategic distance from the loss of force that both the transport crash and the scaffold cutting endured amidst a year ago, I don't know whether it's working yet." BuzzFeed positioned the scene 47th on its positioning of "Veronica Mars" scenes.