The Singles 1992–2003 

The Singles 1992–2003 is a biggest hits collection by American musical crew No Doubt. It was discharged on November 14, 2003, by Interscope Records. It highlights 13 of the band's singles from three studio albums—"Tragic Kingdom" (1995), "Return of Saturn" (2000), and "Shake Steady" (2001)—and the single "Caught in a Box" from their 1992 self-titled presentation collection. The collection likewise incorporated a front of Talk's 1984 tune "It's My Life", the main new tune on the collection and which was discharged as a solitary. It was discharged close by the DVD "Shake Steady Live", a video of a show as a major aspect of the band's Rock Steady visit in 2002, and the case set "Blast Box", which contained "The Singles 1992–2003", "Everything in Time", "The Videos 1992–2003", and "Live in the Tragic Kingdom". 

Most likely went into rest in April 2003 after the arrival of four singles from their fifth studio collection, "Shake Steady", enabling the four individuals to invest energy with friends and family. This likewise permitted their lead vocalist, Gwen Stefani, to take a shot at her performance music side task, under which she has discharged two collections, "Love. Heavenly attendant. Music. Child." in November 2004 and "The Sweet Escape" in December 2006. The band regrouped in September 2003 to record the lead single for the collection, "It's My Life", with maker Nellee Hooper. Furthermore, in May 2010, the band regrouped again to begin chip away at their most recent record. 

The collection sold modestly well, being affirmed twofold platinum in the United States, United Kingdom and Canada, and platinum in Australia. It got for the most part positive surveys from music pundits, who adulated the assortment of music types on the collection. The collection was re-discharged on November 2, 2010, under the title "Symbol", including distinctive work of art. 

Almost certainly discharged their fifth studio collection, "Shake Steady", in December 2001 and from it discharged four singles, "Hello Baby", "Hella Good", "Underneath It All", and "Running" somewhere in the range of 2001 and 2003. The collection was economically fruitful, selling three million duplicates worldwide and being guaranteed platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA). In April 2003, No Doubt went into rest to take a break to invest energy with their families before beginning to aggregate "The Singles 1992–2003", which would include the band's most prominent hits from their past collections. 

The fundamental motivation to go into break was that, in mid 2003, their lead artist Gwen Stefani began chip away at her 1980s-roused music side venture, under which she discharged two solo albums—"Love. Blessed messenger. Music. Infant." on November 23, 2004, and "The Sweet Escape" on December 5, 2006 (notwithstanding another performance collection in 2016, after a No Doubt get-together collection in 2012). 

The collection was an accumulation of 13 monetarily discharged singles by the band from their past studio collections, "Grievous Kingdom", "Return of Saturn", and "Shake Steady", just as the autonomously discharged single "Caught in a Box" from No Doubt's self-titled introduction studio collection, and a fresh out of the plastic new spread rendition of "It's My Life". In any case, "The Singles" did exclude "Upbeat Now?" and "Hello You!", two singles from "Unfortunate Kingdom", neither of which were industrially effective, or "Screech" and "Doghouse" from "The Beacon Street Collection", which were both freely discharged. "Young ladies Get the Bass in the Back", a remix of "Hello Baby", and a live acoustic form of "Underneath It All" were incorporated as extra tracks on worldwide pressings of the collection. 

Being a biggest hits collection and containing just a single new tune, recording "The Singles 1992–2003" took next to no time contrasted and the band's studio collections. Creation began in September 2003 with the account of a spread adaptation of Talk's tune "It's My Life", delivered by Nellee Hooper. The going with music video for the melody was recorded by chief David LaChapelle at the Ambassador Hotel in Los Angeles. Stefani demanded that in light of the fact that no songwriting was associated with the generation of the collection did not mean no exertion would be required: the band needed to choose which of their tunes to incorporate and which to forget. After two months on November 25, the collection was discharged alongside the B-side, irregularity, and remix gathering "Everything in Time" and box set "Blast Box". 

The main single from "The Singles 1992–2003" was a front of the melody "It's My Life", initially discharged in 1984 by the synthpop band Talk. Since the band were taking a break while lead artist Stefani recorded her performance debut collection "Love. Heavenly attendant. Music. Child.", they chose to complete a spread adaptation to abstain from composing another melody. The band tuned in to several melodies and limited it down to "It's My Life" and the tune "Don't Change", discharged in 1982 by Australian new wave band INXS. Almost certainly had questions on chronicle a spread and mulled over composition new material, yet settled on "It's My Life" in the wake of practicing the tune with maker Nellee Hooper, alluding to it as a "vibe decent" tune. Stefani expressed: 

"It's My Life" later wound up one of the band's greatest hits, being confirmed platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association (ARIA) and gold by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA). The tune was designated for Best Pop Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocals at the 47th Grammy Awards, however missed out to Los Lonely Boys' "Paradise". Stuart Price (otherwise called Jacques Lu Cont), the tune's software engineer, made the Thin White Duke blend of "It's My Life", which won the honor for Best Remixed Recording, Non-Classical. 

"The Singles 1992–2003" got commonly positive surveys from music commentators. Mike McGuirk of Rhapsody depicted the collection as "a genuine delight for any individual who has a preference for Gwen Stefani's longing vocals and her band's uncanny capacity to blend ska, youngster pop and hip-bounce." Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic considered the collection an "outstanding accumulation", inferring that it is "the sort of aggregation that fulfills devotees everything being equal and changes over cynics. It's the best hits bundle that [No Doubt] deserve[s]." Anthony Thornton of "NME" expressed, "In spite of being a collection stuffed with as much show as the band themselves have endured, it'll be the pop songs of praise you return for and luckily there's sufficient here to keep even the cleanser addicts upbeat." Sara McDonnell of "musicOMH" composed that the collection's music had "sheer decent variety" because of the band's "pick 'n blend way to deal with melodic styles". The high focuses were "Gwen Stefani's verses, which manage dealing with her very own womanliness" and "the band's joint efforts with different hip makers, for example, The Neptunes, Nellee Hooper and Sly and Robbie; and the depressed spots were the collection's "hotch-potch feel", "arbitrary tracklisting" and the "invasions into reggae". Ruth Mitchell of the BBC Music saw the collection as a normal Christmas collection that seemed to be "probably not going to emerge from the group" and "excessively long, [getting] tedious part of the way through", in spite of the fact that complimenting "Only a Girl", "Hello Baby" and "Underneath It All". Nonetheless, she additionally communicated disillusionment at the arrangement of "Don't Speak", "the foursome's most heavenly pop minute", toward the finish of the collection. "The Rolling Stone Album Guide" later gave the collection four stars out of five. 

"The Singles 1992–2003" appeared at number two on the "Announcement" 200, selling 253,000 duplicates in its first week. The collection was ensured twofold platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) on July 21, 2004, and had sold 2,474,000 duplicates in the United States. In Canada, the collection was guaranteed twofold platinum on June 13, 2005 by the Canadian Recording Industry Association (CRIA), indicating offers of more than 200,000 duplicates. In Australia, the collection was ensured gold in 2003 and platinum in 2004 by the Australian Recording Industry Association, flagging offers of more than 35,000 and 70,000 units, individually. 

"Notes"' 

Credits adjusted from the liner notes of "The Singles 1992–2003". 

Most likely 

Extra artists 

Fine art 

Specialized