Slaty-supported forktail 

The slaty-supported forktail ("Enicurus schistaceus") is a types of forktail in the family Muscicapidae. A thin, medium-sized forktail, it is recognized from comparable species by its slate dark temple, crown, and mantle. It has a long and profoundly forked tail joined in highly contrasting, a white backside, and a white bar over its essential quills; the remainder of the plumage is transcendently white. The genders resemble the other alike. The feathered creature frequents the edges of quick streaming streams and waterways, where it chases little spineless creatures by bouncing among rocks or flying out over the water. It breeds among February and July, laying 3–4 pinkish, pale blue, or white eggs; both genders brood the eggs. 

The slaty-upheld forktail is found close streams and waterways in tropical and subtropical locales, once in a while straying further from streaming water to the edges of streets and trails. For the most part a lone winged creature, it might every so often be found in sets, or in family bunches in the reproducing season. One of its calls has been depicted as like that of the Blyth's kingfisher, for which it has been mixed up. The forktail is found in the focal and eastern Himalayas, the Indian Sub-mainland, southern China and mainland Southeast Asia. Its wide circulation and obviously stable populace have prompted it being named a types of least worry by the International Union for Conservation of Nature. 

The slaty-sponsored forktail was depicted logically in 1836 by British naturalist Brian H. Hodgson. It was initially put in another subgenus "Enicurus" in the variety "Motacilla", which contains the wagtails. The example used to depict the species originated from Nepal. The species name is the Latin descriptor "schistaceus" "slaty-dark". The slaty-upheld forktail is right now put inside the family Muscicapidae, which incorporates Old World flycatchers and visits. A hereditary report found that the slaty-sponsored forktail and the little forktail were hereditarily more unmistakable from the white-delegated forktail than were other forktail species. 

The slaty-upheld forktail is a thin, medium-sized forktail among long, and weighs between . It is shaded slate-dim, dark, and white. The bill is dark, while the feet of the fledgling are a pale pinkish or grayish shading. The iris has been depicted as dull dark colored, however it has been recorded as dark in specific examples. It has a dark throat and a restricted white stripe over its face till simply behind the eyes, in some cases depict as a white veil. The white stripe once in a while incorporates a white eye ring, which might be either finished or halfway. Its ear coverts, jaw, and face are likewise dark. The brow, crown, sides of the neck, and the scapulars are slate dark. It has dark wing-coverts, a white fix at the base of the primaries, wide white bars on generally dark wings, and furthermore an extensive white fix on its rear end and lower back. The bases of the flight plumes are white, which is every so often noticeable as a little extra bar on the wing. The tail of the winged creature is long and equally graduated, with a profound fork. The tail is generally dark with the exception of a white tip. It likewise has three white groups along its length, framed by the white tips of shorter tail quills. 

The adolescent of the species comes up short on a white temple, is darker above, and has dull scales on its bosom. The tail of the adolescent is shorter than that of the grown-up: adolescents likewise have grayish or yellowish legends, and grayish or white jaw and throat. The flanks are a dull dark brown. It isn't explicitly dimorphic. A few examples have been seen to have white tips to their primaries. This component has been guessed to be the consequence of maturing or of mileage, and has been watched all through the circulation of the species. It is known not to be sex-related. Despite the fact that fundamentally the same as the dark supported forktail "Enicurus immaculatus", it is recognized by its slate-dim mantle and crown, from which it gets its name. It likewise has a somewhat bigger bill than the dark supported forktail, and marginally less white on its brow. 

One of the slaty-supported forktail's calls has been depicted as a "high, slight, sharp, metallic shriek, <nowiki>'</nowiki>"'teenk"<nowiki>'</nowiki>", like that made by a little kingfisher; specifically, it has been confused with the call of the Blyth's kingfisher "Alcedo hercules". Another call is portrayed as a smooth ""cheet"". It additionally creates a rehashed, unforgiving shrieking call when frightened. 

The slaty-upheld forktail is found close quick streaming water bodies in tropical and sub-tropical montane broadleaf timberlands, just as close developed zones. These incorporate rough streams and waterways, including expansive waterways and valleys in fields regions. A 2000 paper examining winged creatures in northwest India and Nepal found that the occurrence of slaty-sponsored forktails diminished with elevation. The investigation likewise discovered that the slaty-sponsored forktail had an inclination for streams that were flanked by thick and complex vegetation, and had firm and stable banks of earth. They additionally favored streams with better grained sand on the base, and with "pool–riffle arrangements." More infrequently the winged creature is seen in isolated regions of the woodland, and on the sides of streets or trails close to the water. In winter months it has been seen to move from the mountains into lower regions and fields regions. 

The species is found in the focal and eastern Himalayas, from the Indian territory of Uttarakhand in the west to Myanmar in the East, including Nepal, and Bhutan. It is a vagrant in Bangladesh. It is likewise found in southern China, in southeast Tibet, and in the territories of Sichuan, Yunnan, Guizhou, Fujian and Zhejiang, and perhaps in Hainan. Its range in South-East Asia incorporates Thailand, Vietnam, Laos, Cambodia, peninsular Malaysia, and Hong Kong. In Hong Kong, it is just a periodic winter guest or exceedingly phenomenal occupant. Its appropriation in southeast Asia is broken. The elevational scope of the slaty-supported forktail differs topographically. It has been assessed as 300-1600m above ocean level in northern India, 900–1675 in Nepal, 400–1800 in southern China and the adjoining territories of Thailand, above 500m in Cambodia, above 800m in Malaysia, and 800-2200m in Bhutan. In the winter, it has been recorded as low as 200m above ocean level. 

The scope of the species has not been definitely decided, however is known to be exceptionally huge. The populace is believed to be steady, and however its size isn't definitely known, it is believed to be more noteworthy than 10,000 people. It is sorted as a types of least worry by the International Union for Conservation of Nature. Usually in the pieces of its range that happen in China, Nepal, and South-East Asia. 

The slaty-supported forktail breeds among February and July; the rearing time frame does not seem to fluctuate over its range. It assembles a home with materials including bryophytes, leaves, and grass. The state of the home can be a container or part of an arch, contingent upon where it is assembled. It every now and again has an external layer of mud. The home might be developed in gaps in the ground or in the trunks of trees, between the underlying foundations of trees, in hollows of dead trees, and now and then inside fissure in rocks. The flying creature lays three to four eggs that shift from unadulterated white to pinkish white to somewhat blue white, with lavender or ruddy darker spots. The spots are increasingly basic on the bigger end of the egg. Both genders hatch the eggs. The species is thought to have a few broods in a year. 

The species benefits from little spineless creatures found in or around the water, including hatchlings and shellfish. It searches at the edge of the water, and is depicted as "moving fretfully". It scrounges on and among rocks at the edges of the water just as in mid-stream; it will every so often enter the water also. In spite of the fact that it for the most part searches by bouncing in a coordinated way among rocks, it additionally makes brief attacks over the water to grab nourishment things from the surface. Its flight is depicted as like that of a huge wagtail; fast and direct, and marginally undulating. It is seen for the most part close to the water; normally single, it is once in a while seen in sets, and is depicted as a bashful fledgling. It continually sways its tail, and when irritated it might raise and open its tail with a brisk scissor-like development. In the rearing season is at times in little family gatherings, while in winter it is regularly single. Be that as it may, numerous winged creatures may scrounge in a favored area of a stream: 15 flying creatures have been seen along a solitary stretch of the waterway in Bhutan. 

In the South-East Asian pieces of its range the winged animal is stationary, while in the Himalayas it is seen to move over an elevational angle. A recent report found that the species moved locally because of rising water levels in the rainstorm season.