Jeffrey Pollack 

Jeffrey Pollack (conceived around 1965) is a games business advisor and previous Commissioner of the World Series of Poker. He was instructed at Northwestern University, The Graduate School of Political Management and the University of Massachusetts Amherst. Pollack later went to the six-week Advanced Management Program at Harvard University. After a concise vocation in governmental issues, Pollack moved into the business of games business where he’s held official jobs with the NBA, NASCAR, and the World Series of Poker (WSOP). 

Pollack was recorded on the first of "Sports Business Journal's" "40 Under 40" and twice to The Sporting News 100. He has additionally won two Emmy Awards. Pollack is hitched, and lives in both Los Angeles and Las Vegas. His stepbrother is Gary Bettman, the Commissioner of the National Hockey League. 

In 2011, Pollack propelled Federated Sports+Gaming (FS+G) and the Epic Poker League, where he filled in as Executive Chairman. Inside a year, FS+G had declared financial insolvency. 

In mid 2015, Pollack was contracted as uncommon consultant to the San Diego Chargers. 

On January 22, 2019 Pollack was named as the President and Chief Operating Officer of the XFL, originating from his past job as the Chief Marketing and Strategy Officer and Special Advisor of the San Diego Chargers. 

Pollack got his college degree in news-casting from Northwestern University, notwithstanding two graduate degrees. The main ace's was from The Graduate School of Political Management and his second was in games the executives from the University of Massachusetts Amherst. Pollack in this manner went to the six-week Advanced Management Program at Harvard University. 

At first, Pollack’s profession drove into legislative issues. A late spring entry level position with the American Jewish Congress incited a one-year job with the AJC. He functioned as a lobbyist on enactment that would allow religious headwear for dynamic military individual in noncombat settings. Pollack at that point migrated to Los Angeles to work for Winner and Associates, a main political advertising firm. He was relegated to counsel the Major Baseball League amid the work hardship in the mid 1990s. The beginning of Pollack’s profession in games business happened in 1992 when he realized—while flying from LA to New York—that there was a specialty to fill in the business. 

In February 1994, at 29 years old, Pollack established "The Sports Business Daily". It was the primary every day exchange production for the games business. Pollack demonstrated the idea for the Sports Business Daily on the political day by day "The Hotline". Its essential objective was to “cover the coverage,” or total and sort out every day news that was identified with business of games Doug Bailey, "The Hotline's" author, was Jeffrey Pollack's accomplice in this endeavor. Pollack later noticed that Bailey’s impact was “absolutely critical” to the underlying accomplishment of The Daily. "The Sports Business Daily" initially consumed 3 rooms in a similar structure and at first enlisted "The Hotline's" Stephen Bilafer as the Editor-in-Chief. Individual editorial manager Chuck Todd pursued Bilafer in the move from "The Hotline" to "The Daily". Bilafer would proceed to take note of that it would have been a “deal breaker” had Todd not been allowed to go along with him at the SBD. In the wake of gathering a little article, promoting and deals group, "The Sports Business Daily" propelled on September 12, 1994 in the midst of the “perfect tempest of business and sports stories.” With Pollack as its leader and distributer, "The Sports Business Daily" collected a solid notoriety among to chiefs in the business. At the point when the time "The Sports Business Daily" was sold in 1996, it was a "perceived innovator in games industry news and is depended upon by top games, stimulation, money related, and media administrators around the world." At the season of the deal, "The Sports Business Daily" gave the substance to ESPN's SportsZone "Industry Insider." 

Pollack's vocation with the NBA started when he was contracted as an interchanges specialist for the NBA amid its aggregate haggling course of action. Pollack counseled with NBA official David Stern and helped structure the relaunch system after the NBA lockout in the 1998–99 season. Because of these exercises, Pollack was employed as the Vice President of Marketing and Corporate Communications for the NBA. He stayed with the association until 2000. 

After a concise stretch with a games site, which Pollack once named his “reverse MBA,” he was employed as the Managing Director of Broadcasting and New Media for NASCAR Digital Entertainment. NASCAR had as of late united its media rights and the brand reoriented the manner in which it introduced itself to purchaser item and worldwide media organizations. Pollack built up NASCAR's TV organizations with Fox, FX, NBC and TNT and it was under his direction that NASCAR developed into a noteworthy game. At the time, it rose to the “second-most-watched sports establishment on satellite TV, behind football." Pollack likewise urged NASCAR to utilize propelled media and innovations. One of his focal developments was to make a vivid encounter for watchers at home. He helped built up the digital TV program, NASCAR iN Car, which included mounting cameras that could catch the race from inside the cars.[15] Pollack won two Emmy Awards, subsequently: the Primetime Emmy for Outstanding Achievement in Interactive Television Programming and a Sports Emmy for Outstanding Innovative Technical Achievement. He was likewise the first to get the Billboard Digital Entertainment Award for the best intelligent TV programming. 

In 2005, Harrah's Casino enlisted Pollack as its Vice President of Marketing. While he was authoritatively in charge of Harrah’s sports adventures, which included boxing and engine sports, Pollack expressed that, "My top need is to develop the fame of the World Series of Poker ‶ It is as of now the No. 1 brand in poker, yet we're going to make it much more grounded through world-class media organizations, key showcasing partnerships and unrivaled client administration." By most records, he succeeded doing only this. Pollack brought a scope of changes into the WSOP’s media relations, player relations, competition structure and plan, and ventured into global markets. 

His first obligation with Harrah's was the 2005 World Series of Poker. Poker players' initial introduction of him fixated on the 2005 Tournament of Champions (ToC). The ToC was advertised as a $2.5 million freeroll for which players needed to qualify. In 2005, the ToC was supported by Pepsi, who was going to begin a promoting effort including Doyle Brunson, Johnny Chan, and Phil Hellmuth. Pepsi demanded that its three representatives partake in the ToC and the WSOP assented. Different players protested that three corporate exclusions were conceded ultimately. Pollack was intensely condemned, however tended to the analysis head on and guaranteed that a comparable stumble could never happen. 

On January 13, 2006 he was elevated to Commissioner of the WSOP. One of his first activities as the official was to progress in the direction of maintaining a strategic distance from the analysis of the ToC. Pollack began meeting with a gathering of expert poker players in a month to month chamber. While the board did not have formal basic leadership specialist, Pollack expressed in 2009 that “we haven’t settled on an important choice about occasion plans, structures, rules, and whatnot, since 2006 without the contribution of the Players Advisory Council.” 

Pollack trusted that the achievement of the WSOP was not decided dependent on the quantity of members consistently, yet rather upon the players' encounters. For instance, in 2007 the WSOP smoothed its honor structure. The money grants were appropriated all the more equally with the goal that individuals who went out before earned more cash, while the individuals who made it to the last table won less. 

With an end goal to lessen objections about checked cards, the WSOP went into an association with United States Playing Card Company (USPC). USPC presented another "Poker Peek" cards as the official card of the WSOP. New decks were presented each day at each table. In 2006, Copag gave playing cards that moved toward becoming wrinkled as the occasions suffered, bringing about cards that were basically checked. 

The preparation of WSOP vendors was additionally intensely censured in past competitions. With an end goal to hinder this analysis, the WSOP started escalated preparing for vendors as right on time as March 2007 for more than 300 sellers. The preparation included staff and supervisory preparing. Some portion of the purpose behind this extra preparing was to avert a rehash of the "additional chips" that emerged amid 2006's headliner. Amid the 2006 headliner, the competition completed with a larger number of chips than ordinary chip updating would have prompted. Another push to lessen that hazard was the presentation of exceptional chips only for the headliner. 

In 2008, Pollack overhauled the tournament’s plan and presented a four-month break after the finalists had been resolved in July. The rest was expected to help assemble tension and enable the finalists to advance themselves as “poker ambassadors” before play continued in November. The last two days of play were altered down to a two-hour show and communicate on ESPN. The subsequent finalists were given the moniker "The November Nine." 

Pollack likewise drove the tournament’s worldwide extension with WSOP Europe. The main competition was held in London and facilitated by London Clubs International at three gambling clubs: the Fifty, Leicester Square and the Sportsman. Pollack demanded, “The World Series of Poker Europe will have an extraordinary character, style and pizazz, however will stay consistent with the 38-year convention and legacy of the WSOP.” The WSOPE stayed in England from 2007-2010, was facilitated in France from 2010-2013 and is relied upon to be facilitated in Berlin in 2015. 

Pollack is known for his forceful showcasing. He’s noted on a few events that he’s taken the techniques of the real games brands, for example NASCAR, the NBA, and the NFL, and extricated the prescribed procedures to become the WSOP. He has affirmed, also, that “[s]ports promoting on a very basic level is about the selling of expectation. Fans have the expectation of their most loved group exchanging for the correct player, drafting the correct player, winning a diversion, winning the season, winning the world championship.” And besides that, “[t]he World Series of Poker offers a brand of expectation that is vastly more accessible” seeing that anybody can enter the competition and get an opportunity to play at the last table. 

In the wake of turning into the Commissioner of the WSOP, he arranged organizations with ESPN, Sirius radio, Glu Mobile, Bluff Media, AOL, and Betfair. He additionally orchestrated sponsorships with Miller Brewing Company, Planters and Hershey’s. In 2006, Card Player Media gave hand-by-hand announcing, spilled player interviews, gave player recaps and showed constant chip depend on its site. When Pollack was inquired as to whether proficient poker players would begin wearing garbs secured with advertisements, like NASCAR. He reacted, "That isn't out of the domain of probability. For whatever length of time that they adhere to the rules, players will be permitted to look for support bargains and publicize as they wish." 

Pollack trusted that the quality in the WSOP lies in its custom and heritage. He needed to accomplish more to respect the WSOP's past bosses, "I need to bring our past, our history, and our DNA curious to see what happens." 

Pollack was for the most part gotten well by the players, in spite of the fact that he had protesters. Daniel Negreanu was inspired with his first gathering with Pollack, taking note of that proficient poker is "a special circumstance, similarly as with the NBA players are being paid, while the poker players really set up their very own cash." However, by 2012, Negreanu had changed his sentiment of Pollack, crediting WSOP Vice President Ty Stewart and others for the occasion's development and ubiquity. 

Then again, Pollack’s accentuation on the player’s experience alongside his adequacy in becoming the WSOP thrown him in a decent light. This can be seen most unmistakably through the degree of help he got when he declared his acquiescence as chief. One analyst pronounced, “the news hit the poker world ‶ like a huge amount of bricks,” and that his residency in the job “may be unmatched.” Well-realized players like Phil Hellmuth, Peter Eastgate and Barry Goldstein communicated their regard for Pollack. 

On November 13, 2009, Pollack declared on his Twitter channel that he was leaving as Commissioner. In a different explanation, he remarked, “Everything I set out to achieve in 2005, I think I have achieved. The World Series of Poker is greater than at any other time. The brand is in a solid position and the player experience is superior to it's ever been.” Pollock did not expand on any resulting vocation openings, however stated, "I'm going to pause for a minute to delay and reflect, at that point will thoroughly consider things and settle on certain choices," 

In January 2011, Pollack and Annie Duke declared the dispatch of Federated Sports+Gaming (FS+G), the parent organization for the Epic Poker League. Duke filled in as the league’s magistrate. The EPL was intended to grandstand the best players on the planet and raise them to the status of driving figures similar to symbols in different games. There was to be 200 players conceded and positioned by a framework “driven by arithmetic and demonstrated noteworthy achievement.” Pollack expressed, “I’ve since quite a while ago trusted that the top proficient poker players make huge incentive for the business and are gifted in a manner that is deserving of star treatment,” and besides that, “[o]ur new alliance will praise poker experts more than ever and give a competition involvement with the Palms that is top of the line at each turn.” The principal period of the EPL was slated to incorporate four “rake-free” $20,000 Main Events, notwithstanding a $1 million Championship Event. The EPL had arranged 20 hours of TV programming. Seven of which were to be circulated on CBS and the rest of the 13 on Discovery Communications’ Velocity arrange. 

From right off the bat, business insiders scrutinized the organization's plan of action. By February 2012, after just holding three occasions, FS+G had sought financial protection, producing simply over $38,000 in income and amassing up to $7 million in the red. 

In mid 2015, the San Diego Chargers enlisted Pollack as an uncommon guide to the team’s Chair and President Dean Spanos. Pollack will serve to counsel the group on both future income development and the improvement of another arena. Pollock helped Chargers Special Council Mark Fabiani in the enlisting and distinguishing of Manica, the draftsmen entrusted with structuring an arena in Carson, California.