John Adams (drummer) 

John Adams (conceived October 9, 1951) is a committed enthusiast of the Cleveland Indians, a Major League Baseball crew situated in Cleveland, Ohio. Adams has played his bass drum in the grandstand seats amid about each indian home diversion since 1973, which has brought him reputation and acknowledgment from the Indians and different associations. The Indians pay for two season tickets for Adams and his drum, he has been associated with two stylized first pitches, and he is the main fan for whom the Indians have committed a bobblehead day. 

Adams initially drummed at an Indians diversion on August 24, 1973, at Cleveland Stadium, at an amusement in which the Indians beat the Texas Rangers, 11–5. Adams, who was 21 years of age at the time, has expressed that he conveyed his bass drum to that first diversion since he needed to add to the commotion of "situate slamming", a convention at Cleveland Stadium in which fans would blast the swivel seat of their seats against the seat's base amid tense minutes in the amusement. Be that as it may, Adams liked to sit in the grandstands, where there were no seats to blast. 

Amid the diversion, Bob Sudyk, a columnist for the "Cleveland Press", talked with Adams and inquired as to whether he was going to drum again at the accompanying amusement. Adams said no, yet Sudyk wrote in his article that he would. As indicated by Adams, "not to make a liar out of Bob, I appeared with my drum, and after that I went to the following diversion and the following amusement and the following diversion." The Indians' advancements chief at the time, Jackie York, likewise moved toward Adams and requested that he play at each amusement. Adams formally declined however kept on going to amusements with his drum. 

From that point onward, Adams has sat in the most elevated cheap seat situate in left-focus field with his bass drum; he has missed just around 40 home recreations in 43 seasons. Adams played at Cleveland Stadium until October 1993, when the Indians played their last diversion there. The following spring he moved with the group to its new ballpark, Jacobs Field (renamed Progressive Field in 2008). Adams played the drum at his 3,000th amusement on April 27, 2011. Amid his residency, he has seen Indians pitcher Len Barker pitch an ideal amusement on May 15, 1981, and saw the Indians play in the 1995, 1997, and 2016 World Series. 

Adams still uses a similar 26-inch-wide bass drum he started with in 1973. He has expressed that he gotten it as a component of a set for $25 at a carport deal. It has a similar head in favor of the drum that Adams does not beat, however Adams has expressed that he replaces the opposite side about two times every year and furthermore experiences around three arrangements of hammers every year. Amid amusements, Adams will in general drum at specific minutes: when the Indians take the field toward the start of the diversion, if the Indians have sprinters in scoring position, if the Indians are tied or trailing close to the finish of the amusement, or in the event that they are succeeding at the highest point of the ninth inning. As a result of his drumming, Adams turned into a VIP and his drum was before long nicknamed Big Chief Boom-Boom, by Indians radio commentator Herb Score. It has likewise helped him meet government officials, including U.S. congresspersons and a Pakistani government official. 

Adams has been perceived by the Cleveland Indians and different associations for his long promise to the group. On October 4, 2007, he tossed out the stately first pitch for the Indians' first diversion in the 2007 American League Division Series, against the New York Yankees. After Adams drummed at his 3,000th diversion on April 27, 2011, the Indians praised it the next Saturday, on April 30, 2011, by joining Adams in the stately first pitch and putting on a pregame march highlighting Adams' kindred Indians fans conveying bongos, catches and plastic toy drums. For the stately first pitch, Adams swung at the ball with his drum from home plate after it was tossed by previous Indians player Joe Charboneau. Not long after the move to Jacobs Field, Cleveland started a record-breaking keep running of sellouts, which finished at 455 amusements in April 2001. Before long, the Indians resigned the number 455 to pay tribute to their fans and Adams revealed the memorial sign. 

Adams once paid for his tickets (one for himself, and one for his drum), however the Indians presently pay for two of his season tickets to pay tribute to the commitments he has made to the ballpark environment. Adams purchases an extra two season tickets. In 2006, the Indians gave out bobblehead dolls portraying Adams, making him the main fan for whom the group has committed a bobble head day. 

In 2008, he won the Hilda Award, which is granted every year by The Baseball Reliquary "to perceive recognized support of the diversion by a baseball fan" and is named in memory of Hilda Chester, a devoted aficionado of the Brooklyn Dodgers. In April 2012, Great Lakes Brewing Company, a Cleveland-based bottling works and brewpub, discharged an item called Rally Drum Red Ale out of appreciation for Adams and Opening Day. In April 2015, "The Plain Dealer" feature writer Tim Warsinskey composed a segment recommending that a statue of Adams be worked in Cleveland in his respect. 

Adams likewise has a plaque situated by his seat simply under the left field scoreboard remembering his residency as the Indians' "#1 Fan". 

Adams lives in Brecksville, Ohio, a suburb of Cleveland. He went to both Saint Ignatius High School in Cleveland and Parma Senior High School in Parma, Ohio, where he played bass drum in band before moving on from secondary school in 1969. He moved on from Cleveland State University, where he expects to seek after his graduate degree. He is separated and does not have any kids. Adams chipped away at PC frameworks for AT&T until being laid off in October 2016. He has been encouraging an aquatics class for understudies with handicaps, without pay, at Cleveland State University since 1978. Adams has additionally volunteered his time as an individual from the Kiwanis administration club and the network crisis reaction group in the place where he grew up and has shown CPR and water wellbeing.