Dyer Lum 

Dyer Daniel Lum (1839 – April 6, 1893) was a nineteenth century American rebel, work extremist and artist. A main syndicalist and a noticeable left-wing scholarly of the 1880s, Lum is best recognized as the sweetheart and tutor of early anarcha-women's activist Voltairine de Cleyre. 

Lum was a productive author who composed various key rebel messages and added to distributions including "Mother Earth", "Twentieth Century", "Freedom" (Benjamin Tucker's nonconformist revolutionary diary), "The Alarm" (the diary of the International Working People's Association) and "The Open Court", among others. Following the capture of Albert Parsons, Lum altered "The Alarm" from 1892 to 1893. 

Customarily depicted as a "sophisticated, hypothetical revolutionary", Lum has as of late been recast by the grant of Paul Avrich as a "solid agitator hungry for viciousness and affliction" in the light of his contribution in the Haymarket undertaking in 1886. 

Lum was a relative of the noticeable New England Tappan family as his granddad was an American progressive. With expectations of achieving the finish of subjugation, he volunteered to battle for the Union Army in the American Civil War. He filled in as an auxiliary in the Fourteenth New York Cavalry and later as a brevet commander, seeing battle in the Red River Campaign. A bookbinder in terms of professional career, Lum wound up dynamic in the American work development in the outcome of the war. He filled in as a secretary to Samuel Gompers and kept running for lieutenant legislative head of Massachusetts on the Labor Reform ticket of abolitionist Wendell Phillips in 1870. 

Lum turned out to be generally known in 1877 after a period bridging the nation as secretary to a congressional board of trustees selected to "ask into the misery of work". Somewhere in the range of 1880 and 1892, he was a backer of direct activity and exchange unionism and in later years was "the moving soul of the American gathering" which worked for the recompense of Alexander Berkman's sentence for the last's endeavored death of Henry Clay Frick. Lum ended it all in 1893 in the wake of experiencing extreme gloom, in spite of the fact that at the time the reason for death was accounted for in the rebel press as "greasy degeneration of the heart". 

At the point when Lum met Voltairine de Cleyre in 1888, he was twenty-seven years her senior and had carried on with an actual existence wealthy in experience. They manufactured a "steady" fellowship and Lum affected de Cleyre's political advancement which developed in a contrary bearing to his as she began as a conventional Tuckerite nonconformist rebel, yet turned out to be progressively required with the extreme work development and eventually required a panarchist turmoil without descriptive words development. Their relationship finished following five years of serious association, leaving their arranged community oriented project—a protracted social and philosophical rebel novel—ultimately unpublished. 

Lum was intently connected with and worked close by the saints of the Haymarket issue in Chicago in 1886. In a 1891 paper, he composed that August Spies reached out to the aggressors on the evening of May 4 that they were not to convey arms to the Haymarket. This request was not regarded, Lum note, as "one man ignored that request; constantly self-decided, he followed up on his own obligation, liking to be set up for protection from assault instead of to discreetly mirror the otherworldly "sheep prompted butcher". Lum declared that the eight litigants were at first ignorant of the bomb-hurler's personality, despite the fact that it wound up known to two of them ("yet neither Spies nor Parsons"), accepted by Paul Avrich to be George Engel and Adolph Fischer. 

In Lum's record, the bomb-hurler's name "was never referenced in the preliminary and is today obscure to general society". Paul Avrich verifies that Lum asked Albert Parsons to decline pardon and plotted to protect the revolutionaries from Cook County Jail by assaulting it with explosives. As indicated by de Cleyre, he at that point helped the suicide of Louis Lingg (one of the eight respondents) by carrying into Lingg's jail cell an explosive top covered in a stogie which Lingg along these lines lit, in this manner passing over a large portion of his face and abandoning himself waiting for a few hours in agonizing agony before kicking the bucket. 

Lum's political reasoning was a combination of nonconformist rebel financial aspects, "a radicalized type of "free enterprise" financial matters" propelled by the Boston agitators, with radical work association like that of the Chicago revolutionaries of the time. Lum's thoughts have differently been portrayed as nonconformist revolutionary, syndicalist, mutualist and anarcho-socialist just as rebel without descriptors. Herbert Spencer and Pierre-Joseph Proudhon affected Lum unequivocally in his maverick inclination. He built up a mutualist hypothesis of associations and all things considered was dynamic inside the Knights of Labor and later advanced enemy of political systems in the American Federation of Labor. Disappointment with abolitionism, mysticism and work change caused Lum to grasp turmoil and radicalize specialists as he came to trust that unrest would definitely include a savage battle between the common laborers and the utilizing class. Persuaded of the need of savagery to establish social change, he volunteered to battle in the American Civil War, trusting along these lines to achieve the finish of bondage. Kevin Carson has commended Lum's combination of independent "free enterprise" financial matters with radical work activism as "imaginative" and portrayed him as "more huge than any in the Boston gathering". 

Lum contended in "The Economics of Anarchy" that the work issue was an aftereffect of intercession by the state in making imposing business models, with specific reference to the land and cash syndications. Lum supported the devastation of the land restraining infrastructure which he saw as an administration conceded syndication by annulling land titles and to enable free access to arrive, along these lines making the extraction of lease unimaginable. Also, shared banks set up to issue their very own monetary forms would end the state restraining infrastructure and undercut the capacity of banks and loan specialists to charge premium. His musings could be abridged all things considered: