U.S. Highway 1/9 Truck 

U.S. Highway 1-9 Truck (US 1-9 Truck) is a United States thruway in the northern piece of New Jersey that extends from the eastern edge of Newark to the Tonnele Circle in Jersey City. It is the substitute street for U.S. Highway 1-9 (US 1-9) that trucks must utilize in light of the fact that they are restricted from utilizing the Pulaski Skyway, which conveys the primary courses of US 1-9. It additionally serves traffic getting to the New Jersey Turnpike, Route 440, and Route 7. The course is a four-to six-path street its whole length, with bits of it being a partitioned interstate, that goes through urban territories. From its south end to part of the way through Kearny, US 1-9 Truck is interstate standard, with access to different streets constrained by trades. 

While the US 1-9 Truck assignment was first utilized in 1953, the roadway containing the course was initially assigned as an augmentation of pre-1927 Route 1 of every 1922, a course that in its full length extended from Trenton to Jersey City. US 1-9 was assigned along the street in 1926 and after one year, in 1927, this bit of pre-1927 Route 1 was supplanted with Route 25 just as with a segment of Route 1 north of the Communipaw Avenue crossing point. Following the opening of the Pulaski Skyway in 1932, US 1-9 and Route 25 were realigned to the new skyway. After trucks were prohibited from the skyway in 1934, the part of Route 25 among Newark and Route 1 was assigned as Route 25T. In 1953, US 1-9 Truck was assigned for Route 25T and Route 1 along this portion of street. The segment of the truck course north of Route 7 is being remade as a component of a $271.9 million venture to develop new methodology streets to interface US 1-9 Truck, Route 7, the Pulaski Skyway, Route 139, and US 1-9 north of Tonnele Circle and neighborhood avenues in Jersey City. Development, which began in late 2008, was finished in late 2012. 

US 1-9 Truck starts at an exchange with access to and from the southbound course US 1-9, the Pulaski Skyway, in the Ironbound area of the city of Newark in Essex County. The truck course is intended to sidestep the segment of US 1-9 along the Pulaski Skyway, which trucks are confined from. It proceeds onto Raymond Boulevard, which proceeds with west from the US 1-9 and US 1-9 Truck exchange into downtown Newark. The truck limitation on Route 1-9 is for the "security and welfare of general society" as indicated by the New Jersey Department of Transportation, not a particular scaffold imperfection. Now, the truck course turns into a four-path separated interstate, making a beeline for the east. A short separation later, the street goes to an exchange with the New Jersey Turnpike (Interstate 95) and Doremus Avenue before traverse the Passaic River on a vertical lift connect. Here, the course enters Kearny in Hudson County and proceeds with east into mechanical territories as the Lincoln Highway. The street has a right-in/ideal out in the two bearings that gives access to Jacobus Avenue before it goes to a trade with County Route 659. From here, US 1-9 Truck turns into a six-path isolated expressway and goes to an at-grade crossing point with Hackensack Avenue. Past this convergence, the street crosses the Hackensack River on a vertical lift scaffold and enters Jersey City. After entering Jersey City, the street moves toward becoming Communipaw Avenue and meets the northern end of Route 440 close to the Hudson Mall. 

At this crossing point, Communipaw Avenue proceeds toward the east and US 1-9 Truck swings toward the north, turning into an anonymous four-path unified street. bisecting Lincoln Park before going to a crossing point with County Route 605. Here, the street turns into a four-path isolated interstate once more, passing some urban business territories before running between wetlands toward the west and Holy Name Cemetery toward the east. The course heads into increasingly business zones again before passing urban living arrangements, going to a crossing point that gives access to the Pulaski Skyway. Here, US 1-9 Truck turns east on Broadway, going through a business area. A short separation later, it turns north onto an anonymous street with County Route 642 proceeding with east on Broadway. The course goes under a Conrail Shared Assets Operations railroad line and PATH's Newark – World Trade Center Line before intersection under the Pulaski Skyway. Following, US 1-9 Truck crosses the eastern end of Route 7 and swings toward the east, with County Route 645 proceeding with north at this convergence. The truck course turns into a four-path partitioned thruway called the St. Paul's Viaduct that hurries toward the north of the Pulaski Skyway and goes through modern areas, traverse a Conrail railroad line and County Route 646. A short separation later, US 1-9 Truck goes to the Tonnele Circle with US 1-9 and Route 139, where it closes. 

The East Coast Greenway keeps running along the north side of the parkway. 

What is currently U.S. 1-9 Truck among Newark and Jersey City was initially the Newark Plank Road; in 1913 this turned into the main portion of the Lincoln Highway. The present course of US 1-9 Truck was assigned to be an augmentation of pre-1927 Route 1 of every 1922, a course that was to keep running from Trenton to Jersey City. 

At the point when the U.S. Interstate System was built up in 1926, the present truck course turned into a piece of the US 1-9 simultaneousness. After a year, in the 1927 New Jersey state roadway renumbering, Route 25 was assigned to keep running along the whole length of the course alongside US 1-9 as a feature of its voyage from the Benjamin Franklin Bridge in Camden to the Holland Tunnel in Jersey City, while Route 1 was likewise assigned along the segment north of Communipaw Avenue in Jersey City as a piece of its steering from Bayonne to Rockleigh. 

Following the opening of the Pulaski Skyway in 1932, US 1-9 and Route 25 were moved to the new extension. After trucks were prohibited from the Pulaski Skyway in 1934, the part of Route 25 among Newark and Route 1 was assigned as Route 25T. In the 1953 New Jersey state expressway renumbering, US 1-9 Truck was assigned to supplant all of Route 25T just as the bit of Route 1 between Route 25T and the Tonnele Circle. 

Starting in 2009 the New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT) supplanted the viaduct that conveys the course over St. Paul's Avenue and Conrail line. The St. Paul's Viaduct was worked in 1928 and decided fundamentally inadequate. The $271.9 million substitution was finished in September 2011. Notwithstanding supplanting the St. Paul's Avenue viaduct, the ways to deal with US 1-9 Truck between Route 7 and the Tonnele Circle were improved. 

Fully expecting a general increment of movement in Port of New York and New Jersey and new advancement on West Side and Hackensack Riverfront examines are being led to make the convergence with Route 440 a staggered traffic circle and northern and southern (Route 440) ways to deal with it into a multi-utilize urban street that incorporates level divisions and extra medians.