Richard Swinefield 

Richard Swinefield (or Richard de Swinfield; passed on 15 March 1317) was a medieval Bishop of Hereford, England. He graduated specialist of godliness before holding various religious workplaces, including that of Archdeacon of London. As a priest, he devoted consideravle endeavors to verifying the canonisation of Thomas de Cantilupe, his forerunner, for whom he had worked amid his lifetime. Dynamic in his ward, he gave brief period to governmental issues. He was covered in Hereford Cathedral where a dedication to his memory still stands. 

Swinefield's last name may originate from Swingfield situated close Folkestone, Kent. His dad was Stephen of Swinfield, who kicked the bucket in 1282, and his sibling Stephen remained a layman. No other data about his family and childhood, including his date of birth, has developed. He was a specialist of eternality degree, yet where he graduated isn't known. 

By 1264 Richard Swinefield was an individual from the family of Thomas de Cantilupe, later to be made Bishop of Hereford in 1275. By 1279 Swinefield held the prebend of Hampton inside the bishopric, before 1279 and was to hold it until he turned into a religious administrator. Not long after 17 April 1280 he was named Archdeacon of London, having recently held an obscure prebend in the see of London. 

Richard Swinefield was chosen to the see of Hereford, or ministerial office, on 1 October 1282. The race was affirmed by John Peckham, the Archbishop of Canterbury on 31 December 1282, and he went into ownership of the spiritualities and transiences, or the ministerial and lay salary creating properties, of the see by 8 January 1293. He was blessed on 7 March 1283. 

Amid Richard Swinefield's time as priest, he was not engaged with legislative issues, and invested the greater part of his energy in his see. He once in a while went to Parliament, for the most part pardoning himself on the grounds of dire diocesan business or his own terrible wellbeing. He acquired various claims from his antecedent, which he figured out how to settle. He likewise settled a disagreement regarding the limit between the ward of Hereford and the Welsh bishopric of St Asaph, to the benefit of Hereford. In his conflicts with the town of Hereford, he was minimal slanted to give path and on one event compromised banning. 

Priest Swinefield was worried to guarantee that his church were all around treated. He attempted to guarantee that temples inside his see were not misused through the giving of authority to shameful hopefuls, and was watchful over ascetic houses. His fundamental endeavors, however, went toward verifying the canonisation of his antecedent Thomas de Cantilupe. This did not anyway occur until 1320, after Swinefield's demise. 

Richard Swinefield passed on 15 March 1317, and was covered in Hereford Cathedral, where a commemoration in the transept's north divider delineates him in priest's robes and holding a structure. Two of his nephews were given workplaces inside the bishopric, with John given the precentorship in Hereford Cathedral, and Gilbert made the chancellor there. Another conceivable relative was Richard Swinfield, who likewise held a prebend in the see. 

A record of Swinefield's costs as religious administrator has made due for the years 1289 and 1290. The records offer an uncommon look at the association and costs of a noteworthy family unit at that period. Amid the 296 days secured by the record, his family unit moved multiple times, with 38 of these stops related with him visiting his see amid April through June. The record likewise demonstrates that he bolstered two researchers at the University of Oxford. The record has been altered various occasions, including by the Camden Society in 1853-1855.