So Long Self 

"So Long Self" is a tune composed and performed by Christian musical gang MercyMe. "So Long Self" is musically a melody with an expressive topic spinning around a metaphorical separation with one's self. "So Long Self" was discharged as the lead single from the band's 2006 collection "Coming Up to Breathe". 

"So Long Self" got positive gathering from commentators, who adulated the melody's melodious snare. It was included by fifty-two Christian AC stations in its first outline week, a record for the Christian AC diagram. The tune had accomplishment on both Christian and standard radio, cresting at number one on the Christian Songs outline for four back to back weeks; it likewise topped at number sixteen on the Adult Contemporary graph. It was recorded on "Board" magazine's multi year-end Christian Songs and Adult Contemporary outlines. 

Lead artist Bart Millard has portrayed the story behind "So Long Self" as "...really basic: It’s Not About [humanity]. It never has been and it never will be. Much the same as when possibly you needed to part ways with a sweetheart or a beau growing up, or perhaps something very similar transpired, a definitive separation in life is the point at which we separation with ourselves. Since Christ said you need to kick the bucket to self to tail him". The melody is likewise expressively about a separation with wicked human instinct. 

"So Long Self" was composed and made by MercyMe. It was recorded in Allaire Studios in Shokan, New York; overdubs were recorded in Oxford Sound in Nashville, Tennessee, while strings were recorded at Abbey Road Studios in London, England. "So Long Self" is a melody with a length of four minutes and three seconds. The melody is set in the key of E major and has a rhythm of 144 beats for each moment, with a vocal range spreading over from B to E. "So Long Self" includes a guitar solo close to the finish of the tune, and the extension of the tune highlights what has been portrayed as Electric Light Orchestra-impacted vocals. 

"So Long Self" got positive surveys from commentators. Steve Losey of Allmusic remarked that "['So Long Self'] has mass intrigue musically and melodiously", likewise opining that "the coolest part about the poppy snare is the ELO type vocals that enter the tune's center". Lauren Summerford of Jesus Freak Hideout expressed that "Lead single 'So Long Self' is one the best tracks "Coming Up To Breathe" brings to the table. With a melodious snare beyond any doubt to have radio audience members chiming in, this tune discovers [Bart] Millard saying goodbye to evil nature and drawing nearer to Christ". Russ Breimeier of "Christianity Today" remarked that "It nearly appears as though MercyMe is overcompensating to increase aesthetic believability with the fun single 'So Long Self,' an unquestionably infectious separation melody with our evil nature that echoes <nowiki>[Steven Curtis]</nowiki> Chapman covering The Beatles, venturing to such an extreme as to energetically summon a jubilee in the scaffold". 

Upon discharge, the tune was included by fifty-two Christian AC stations - a record for the most includes the historical backdrop of the Christian AC diagram. The record was already forty-five includes, achieved by the Joy Williams tune "Cover up" (2005). "So Long Self" later crested at number one on the Christian AC diagram, just as at number one on the Christian Songs outline and at number sixteen on the Adult Contemporary graph. 

"So Long Self" appeared at No. 26 on "Bulletin" magazine's Christian Songs graph for the diagram seven day stretch of April 1, 2006. The tune hopped up to No. 15 the following week before progressing to No. 10 in its fourth graph week. "So Long Self" progressed to No. 4 for the graph seven day stretch of May 13, 2006, and hit No. 1 ten weeks after the fact, a detect the tune held for four sequential weeks. After "So Long Self" spent its fourth and last a long time at the top, the tune burned through nine additional weeks on the graph before dropping. On the whole, "So Long Self" went through twenty a month and a half on the graph. On the "Bulletin" Adult Contemporary graph, "So Long Self" appeared at No. 38 for the diagram seven day stretch of May 6, 2006, and progressed to No. 23 in its second week on the diagram. The tune progressed to No. 20 in its fourth week on the outline and went through a further three weeks inside the best 20 preceding dropping back to No. 22 on its eighth graph week. "So Long Self" achieved its inevitable pinnacle of No. 16 for the diagram seven day stretch of August 5, 2006, and went through a further a month and a half on the graph before dropping. On the whole, "So Long Self" went through twenty weeks on the diagram. 

"Bulletin" positioned "So Long Self" at No. 10 on its multi year-end Christian Songs outline, and at No. 33 on its year-end Adult Contemporary diagram. They likewise positioned the melody at No. 61 on the 2000s decade-end Hot Christian AC outline. 

A music video was discharged for "So Long Self". The video opens with the individuals from the band viewing a TV program of their live soundcheck for a show. At the point when the band acknowledges it can't in any way, shape or form be playing a 'live' soundcheck since they are in their visit transport, they leave the vehicle to stop the shams. The genuine band individuals trap the fakes in a room, and after that go out in front of an audience and perform. Close to the finish of the video, security kicks the phony band individuals out of the field. 

Matt Johnson of Jesus Freak Hideout remarked about the video on his survey of MercyMe's collection "10", noticing that "A great many people consider genuine reverential tunes, (for example, "I Can Only Imagine" and "Expression of God Speak") when they consider MercyMe, however the "So Long Self" video catches a side that most don't think about, their fun side".