Mythical beast's Run 

Mythical beast's Run is a steel exciting ride produced by Swiss organization Bolliger and Mabillard and situated at Dragon Park Ha Long in Vietnam. The liner was moved from Freestyle Music Park in Myrtle Beach, South Carolina, where it last worked as Time Machine. The ride initially opened to the general population on April 15, 2008, under the name Led Zeppelin: The Ride as one of the principle attractions at Hard Rock Park. Because of money related troubles, Hard Rock Park shut following five months of activity. The recreation center re-opened in 2009 with new proprietors and another name, yet shut toward the finish of the period. The vast majority of the rides and attractions have been expelled from the grounds. 

Plans for a Hard Rock-themed event congregation were discharged in 2003; at the time, be that as it may, financing and permitting understandings presently couldn't seem to be finished. By 2006, a permitting concurrence with the Hard Rock establishment was come to. Hard Rock Park was declared in mid 2007. The recreation center's leader fascination, "Drove Zeppelin – The Ride", would be a Bolliger and Mabillard sit-down exciting ride themed for the English musical crew of a similar name. By July 2007 development for the ride was in progress, with the lift slope finished. 

"Driven Zeppelin – The Ride" delicate opened to people in general on April 15, 2008, with the main seats sold for philanthropy. The ride's legitimate opening was on May 9, 2008. Amid activity, the liner would play Led Zeppelin's "Entire Lotta Love" through an on-board sound framework. In September 2008, Hard Rock Park petitioned for Chapter 11 liquidation because of the powerlessness to pay its obligations. Its proprietors later declared financial insolvency under Chapter 7, enabling them to sell the recreation center. 

In February 2009, FPI MB Entertainment obtained the recreation center. As a major aspect of the securing it was renamed Freestyle Music Park, with every authorized topic evacuated. "Driven Zeppelin – The Ride" was renamed "The Time Machine", with the on-board sound a choice of tunes from the 1960s to the 2000s. The new park formally opened on May 23, 2009; notwithstanding, the destiny of Freestyle Music Park was like that of its ancestor and the recreation center shut in September 2009. The liner stayed standing however not working for just about five years. 

The ride was posted available to be purchased on www.italintl.com incorporated into a heap of segments of the previous Freestyle Music Park. 

In 2014 Time Machine was obtained by what was then another, anonymous park under development in Vietnam. On August 21, 2014, cranes had been set up alongside the Time Machine to start the way toward disassembling, and components of the finale had just been expelled. 

On January 25, 2017, the ride opened as Dragon's Run at the new Dragon Park Ha Long in Vietnam. 

The Time Machine highlighted six reversals over the ride, including two vertical circles, a cobra roll, a zero-g roll and a corkscrew. Riders achieved a top speed of . All through the ride, travelers could tune in to five distinct soundtracks over speakers incorporated with the trains. The trains had eight single-push vehicles, seating riders four crosswise over for a sum of thirty-two seats for every train. 

After the train left the station, it climbed the chain lift slope. It at that point dropped before entering the principal vertical circle. This was trailed by a cobra roll and a zero-g roll. A second, littler vertical circle would lead the train into an expansive helix before the mid-course brake run. The ride at that point dropped into another little helix before exploring through a corkscrew. A third helix pursued before the train hindered in the last brake run and came back to the station. 

Audits of the Time Machine were blended. "The Coaster Critic", evaluating Led Zeppelin – The Ride, depicted its general ride understanding as an "extraordinary fascination", adulating its pre-appear and synchronized soundtrack and rating the ride 8.5 out of 10. Jeremy Thompson of "Exciting ride Philosophy" gave a comparable audit, getting a charge out of the ride and positioning it number 15 on his top-liners list; in any case, he reprimanded the absence of components amid the ride's second half. Arthur Levine of "About.com" developed Thompson's analysis, calling the ride one of North America's main 10 exaggerated exciting rides. Levine depicted it as a "great looking liner" which "has no broadcast appointment, shivers a bit as it conveys a couple of head-slamming minutes, and is generally dull". In Mitch Hawker's overall Best Roller Coaster Poll, the Time Machine crested at number 102 in its introduction year (2008). In 2009, it dropped to 138th out of 368 positioned steel thrill rides.