Each Sunday 

Each Sunday (here and there mistakenly recorded as Every Sunday Afternoon or Opera versus Jazz) is a 1936 American short melodic film. It recounts to the account of two pre-adult young ladies and their endeavors to spare an open show arrangement, which was being undermined by poor participation. 

Coordinated by Felix E. Feist, the film filled in as a screen test for, and is the principal noteworthy screen appearance of, two youthful performing artists who before long moved toward becoming stars, Judy Garland and Deanna Durbin. Albeit just daintily investigated at the season of its discharge, the film has earned a by and large positive notoriety among Garland biographers. 

Community companions Edna (Deanna Durbin) and (Judy Garland) are disturbed. Edna's granddad and his symphony, who play free Sunday shows at a neighborhood park, have been terminated by the town gathering in light of the fact that the shows are inadequately visited. The young ladies hit upon singing at the shows and begin advancing the following show. The next Sunday Edna and Judy join Granddad on the bandstand. Edna's operatic style and Judy's swing bring swarms running from everywhere throughout the recreation center. The occasion is an enormous achievement and Granddad's shows are spared. 

Deanna Durbin and Judy Garland were both under contract to Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer yet the studio had not given them something to do in movies. With their agreements coming up for restoration, sentiments among studio administrators were that the studio didn't require two young lady vocalists. "Each Sunday" would fill in as an all-inclusive screen test to choose which young lady's agreement would be recharged. 

Durbin recorded the aria "Il Bacio" for the film. Arrangers Con Conrad and Herb Magidson composed a strength number for Garland, "The Americana." 

Following the screening of the short for MGM officials, feeling was isolated on whether Garland or Durbin ought to be held. At long last, Louis B. Mayer, upon his arrival from an European trek, proclaimed that the two young ladies ought to be kept. Be that as it may, Durbin's agreement choice had lapsed by at that point. She was marked by Universal Studios, where her first picture, "Three Smart Girls" (1936), was successful to the point that it spared Universal from chapter 11. 

As a short film that filled in as a developer, "Each Sunday" got inadequate basic consideration upon its discharge. Durbin's main residence paper, the "Winnipeg Free Press", praised the film, bemoaning that it was "very short" and refering to Garland as a "young lady vocalist of refinement." 

Wreath biographers, while talking about the film in any detail, are commonly complimentary both to the film and to Garland. "Straightforward and fascinating..."Every Sunday" gives us a grand look at Judy's ability in a grungy state" is a normal remark, with the film "reveal[ing] how achieved an entertainer Judy Garland previously was at fourteen." Durbin does not admission very too. Albeit depicted by one biographer as seeming "loose" and "upbeat" in video form others expel her "reserve" and call her "hardened."