The Gift That Keeps Giving 

"The Gift That Keeps Giving" is a melody by Super Furry Animals taken from their 2007 collection, "Hello Venus!". It was given away as a free download single from the band's legitimate site on Christmas Day 2007. 

The melody was imagined as a Christmas single as a major aspect of the band's arrangements to make a "pop record" in parent collection "Hello Venus!" The title comes from sessions in 2004 for the all-encompassing live form of "The Man Don't Give a Fuck", at which the gathering's specialist repeatably utilized the expression. Basic reaction to "The Gift That Keeps Giving" was commonly positive with the "NME" guaranteeing it to be a standout amongst the best tunes on "Hello Venus!" and BBC Wales depicting the track as "cerebrum bendingly infectious". 

A Team D.A.D.D.Y. coordinated music video was made to go with the track's discharge as a solitary. The video includes a spoilt kid being showered with Christmas presents while more unfortunate youngsters are appeared in tears because of their absence of presents. Two distinct endings for the video were created - in one Santa Claus is appeared on a cross while another sees Santa laid on the floor with a bolt through his head. 

In a 2008 meeting with "Whole" artist Gruff Rhys expressed that "The Gift That Keeps Giving" was composed as an "AOR Christmas single" after a visit to Japan where "they observe Christmas as a business occasion with every one of the improvements .. in one store they had Santa on a cross swinging from the divider ... so the Christmas single was only a reason to have Santa on a cross on the spread". Despite the fact that the spread craftsmanship did not at last element this scene, an executed Santa appears in the going with music video. 

Addressing British music magazine "Artrocker" Rhys offered another clarification with regards to the beginnings of the melody: 

The track was recorded at Miraval Studios, France alongside the remainder of "Hello Venus!" 

"The Gift That Keeps Giving" is 3 minutes 20 seconds in length and is in the key of D minor. The track starts with a staged guitar song supported just by synthesizer, hey cap and periodic guitar harmonies. Cian Ciaran's piano joins the blend as the tune develops with the presentation of drums at 25 seconds. Abrupt Rhys starts singing following 39 seconds and is joined by sleighbells which go with the lines "every one of the chimes began ringing" in no time before the principal ensemble which highlights agreement backing vocals (the first of numerous in the "falsetto-loaded" track) singing the title expression. Another stanza and ensemble pursue before an instrumental section at 1 minute 46 seconds highlighting a trumpet solo playing around the vocal song. The tune "crescendos gently" with a twofold ensemble before entering the outro which at first incorporates verbally expressed word backing vocals reciting "giving once more" and is "improved by a horn segment that the Furries appear to have the capacity to use more successfully than any other individual". 

Basic response to "The Gift That Keeps Giving" was commonly positive with the "New Musical Express" appraising it as a standout amongst the best on parent collection "Hello Venus!"; "[it doesn't so much raise] the bar, as equalizations it over Mount Snowdon" proceeding to state: "From an establishment of ELO guitar cloud-swells, Gruff's Elvis Costello-in-a-bubblegum-shower voice folds over delicate trombone parps to make the band's most excellent minute since "Devils". BBC Wales remarked on the track's Christmas joins, depicting "The Gift That Keeps Giving" as a "smooth, resonant, moderate tribute to the delights of the bubbly season ... expressively unfathomably basic ... cerebrum bendingly infectious". "The Guardian" in the mean time, expressed that the melody "may sound a larger number of California than Christmas" yet has the "mandatory sleighbells ... shaken all through". Much was made of the 'retro' idea of the track with Yahoo Music UK asserting that the melody is "an unadulterated blue-peered toward soul tune, of the sort that Dan Penn and Spooner Oldham used to produce four decades back" and "The Guardian" portraying it as an "exquisite, Bacharach-tinged dimness". Interestingly the "UCSD Guardian" portrayed "The Gift That Keeps Giving" as "energetic" and "lo-fi" and considered it to be "a return to 2000's exploratory "Mwng"". 

"Announcement" noticed that "the gathering's inclination for sonic twists is utilized to inconspicuous impact" on "The Gift That Keeps Giving" and proceeded to propose that the track is illustrative of "Hello Venus!" in general. "Cokemachineglow", in any case, suspected that the melody "will be thrown into the void, one brave, forlorn bit of the main Super Furry Animals collection to not prevail as an intensive unit" and, in their single audit of "The Gift That Keeps Giving", the "NME" proposed that the track wasn't one of the gathering's ideal. 

The band's choice to utilize Japanese surrealist Keiichi Tanaami to deliver the spread for "Hello Venus!" and its singles got some analysis, not least on the grounds that the craftsman had effectively utilized comparable plans. In a 2005 meeting with German magazine "Komakino", console player Cian Ciaran expressed that the work of art for "The Gift..." "was" extraordinary, in any case, and adulated the craftsman. 

The video for "The Gift That Keeps Giving" was coordinated by Team D.A.D.D.Y. furthermore, spins around a merry topic with regards to the track's discharge date of Christmas day. 

The video opens with a spoilt tyke opening various Christmas presents including a toy train, a case loaded with little cats and a duplicate of "Hello Venus!" (which he tosses behind him in nauseate). Towards the finish of the video less special kids are appeared at their absence of presents before we slice back to the underlying tyke who is encompassed by presents while Santa Claus is found before a log fire, killed on a cross. An elective closure rather includes Santa lying on the floor with a bolt through his head. 

In spite of the obviously pessimistic nature of the video, BBC Wales states that it is "not intended to be perused in any more profound dimension than 'ain't Christmas splendid?'" 

All tunes by Super Furry Animals. 

In spite of the fact that the track was at first answered to accompanied a "selective b-side" this turned out not to be the situation and just "The Gift That Keeps Giving" was made accessible.