Tropical storm Henri 

Storm Henri was an uncommon tropical violent wind that entered the Gulf of Mexico without having made landfall; it was the second of multiple times this happened amid the twentieth century. The eighth named tempest and fifth typhoon of the 1979 Atlantic sea tempest season, it framed on September 14 in the northwestern Caribbean Sea. All through a lot of its span, Henri moved unpredictably and at first kept up a general westbound track. On September 16 it achieved typhoon status, and multi day later it achieved sea tempest status. By two days after the fact, in the wake of encountering unfriendly conditions, Henri debilitated to tropical gloom status as it swung toward the upper east, and on September 24 it converged with a frontal low in the upper east Gulf of Mexico. Because of its moderate and flighty movement, the storm constrained clearings along the Mexican coastline. Its leftovers conveyed precipitation and flooding to the Florida Panhandle. 

Sea tempest Henri created as Tropical Depression Eighteen in the outrageous northwestern Caribbean Sea on September 14 from a tropical wave, which had recently gotten off the shoreline of Africa. The arrangement of a tropical despondency was affirmed by reports from Hurricane Hunters. The sorrow followed northward, brushing the eastern part of the Yucatăąn Peninsula. In the wake of achieving the Gulf of Mexico it turned pointedly westbound, with an edge forestalling further northward development. The wretchedness turned southwestward, and heightened into Tropical Storm Henri on September 16. 

Typhoon Henri kept on increasing as it followed through the Bay of Campeche. On September 17, the tempest turned northwestward after the edge to its north debilitated, and soon thereafter Henri achieved sea tempest status; after six hours, it achieved top breezes of 85â mph (140â km/h) about 150â miles (245â km) upper east of Veracruz. In this manner, a wide low weight territory created over the western Gulf of Mexico, causing the movement of Henri to wind up whimsical. On September 18, the violent wind started an enduring debilitating pattern, accepted to have been brought about via land cooperation and the channeling of dampness toward a creating aggravation close to the Texas coast. Henri turned eastbound on September 19 and debilitated to tropical gloom status. It neglected to recapture noteworthy convection, and it turned northeastward along an all-encompassing virus front. On September 24, Henri converged with the frontal trough in the northeastern Gulf of Mexico. 

Sea tempest Henri was one of just four tropical violent winds to enter the Gulf of Mexico without making landfall amid the twentieth century. The others were Laurie of 1969, Jeanne of 1980, and Alberto of 1982. 

Despite the fact that Henri did not influence land at all as a storm, the creating framework compromised a few states along the southwestern coastline in Mexico. Mexican determining authorities issued a warning for the Gulf coast towns of Tampico in Tamaulipas, and Tuxpan and Nautla in Veracruz, to empty to higher ground. The legislature of Veracruz issued admonitions on radio and TV of conceivable flooding in oil-rich coastlines. The tempest influenced cleanup activities of the Ixtoc I oil slick as it ignored the spill region, harming a 310-ton steel top intended to stop the victory. Henri caused driving downpours, solid breezes, and floods in Ciudad del Carmen, Campeche, compelling over 2000â people from their homes. Waters swelled in the town to about 12â inches (305â mm) above ocean level. Most extreme precipitation recorded in Mexico in relationship with Henri was at Solosuchiapan. 

The remainders of Henri conveyed showers and rainstorms to west-focal Florida, causing waterway flooding and a few clearings.