Without hesitating (computer game) 

Without hesitating is an experience diversion created by Revolution Software for the PlayStation and Microsoft Windows in 2000 in Europe and in 2001 in North America. The player accept the job of John Cord—an MI6 operator who is caught while on task and attempts to make sense of who deceived him through a progression of flashbacks. 

After the accomplishment of the initial two "Broken Sword" diversions on the PlayStation, Sony reached Revolution Software to build up an amusement to be discharged at first on the support. Upheaval needed to move far from the style of its past undertakings, making an amusement with a mystery specialist topic and set in an activity situation. Chief Charles Cecil expressed that the diversion was propelled by wrongdoing movies, for example, "Mash Fiction" and "The Usual Suspects". The amusement motor was composed explicitly for the title. It was discharged to average surveys from commentators, who adulated the diversion's story, riddles and designs, however scrutinized its controls, activity scenes and liveliness. 

"Without a second thought" is a 3D experience amusement played from a third-individual point of view. By means of an immediate control interface, the player guides John Cord's developments with a console or gamepad. String must gather questions that can be utilized with other collectible articles, portions of the view, or other individuals in the amusement world to explain riddles and advancement in the diversion. String can take part in discourse with different characters through discussion trees to pick up indications of what should be done to illuminate the riddles or to advance the plot. Activity scenes are likewise included. 

"Without a second thought" is arranged in Volgia, an anecdotal state on the east bank of the previous USSR. After the Soviet Union crumbled, Dmitri Nagarov, head of knowledge and security, accepted the open door to oust existing forces and proclaimed autonomy. After his overthrow, Volgia began to attack its neighbors. The Volgian Freedom Fighters (VFF) is an opposition development that is controlled by Gregor Kostov. The VFF has discovered that the Volgians have obtained some uncommon innovation and has educated the Americans. They sent a government operative named Kiefer to research, yet correspondences were lost while he was exploring a uranium mine. The British were requested help, and Alpha, the supervisor of MI6, sends specialist John Cord, a long-lasting companion of Kiefer, to explore. 

After the presentation which demonstrates portions of Cord's missions, the amusement begins with a scene in which Cord is investigated at this point head Dmitri Nagarov, while he is being tormented by his collaborator Lukyan. After the torment, Cord is battling for his mental stability, and all he knows without a doubt is that he was double-crossed. He endeavors to sort out the pieces of his memory, and the player must remake the occasions that prompted his catch. 

The diversion incorporates nine missions that Cord needs to finish. Pretty much every mission closes with a transitional cut scene, demonstrating how Cord is examined and tormented. These scenes incorporate different characters like Alpha or Kostov, who will give data about the following missions. 

Line goes to the uranium mine to find Kiefer, yet discovers him dead. While there, he catches a discussion between Chi-Ling Cheung (a mystery specialist of the People's Republic of China) and Byrdoy Tolstov (a teacher in connected material science and science). Tolstov uncovers that they are not digging for uranium, however that they are exploring different avenues regarding an uncommon compound called tri-nepheline. Tolstov's little girl Alexandria is being held prisoner at Security Headquarters (HQ), and Cord safeguards her with the assistance of Chi, who is associated with being a covert agent. Subsequently, Cord plants a bug on a safe server and evacuates a hard drive containing data identifying with the VFF. Line goes to the Containment Facility to secure Nagarov. 

On the Kappa level, Cord wrecks a tremendous robot called Specter, and on the Omega level, he discovers "examples" held in cases in a lab. Rope raises the case with Yerik Dimittrivich Oliakov, a previous University Lecturer, who advises Cord about a spot "where ships go to kick the bucket." Nagarov lands with Alexandria before him. Nagarov claims that he has hacked the PCs of the Americans and Chinese, to reproduce that every one of them is planning for war, so he can go on with his arrangements for Volgia. String later goes into a room where Professor Tolstov is working, who reveals to him that the spot "where ships go to kick the bucket" is Vostograd, a relinquished maritime base, where Nagarov will dispatch his rocket. A smaller than usual robot murders Tolstov, however Cord utilizes his ID card to access the refinery's molecule barrage machine called Baby Blue, which he crushes with a bomb. Having gotten together with Kostov once more, they leave to find a truck with the dead collections of Kostov's men. Kostov suspects Chi is a deceiver. 

String and Chi invade Nagarov's base to obliterate the Super Computer. On the top of an expansive pinnacle, Cord demolishes a structure with a surface-to-air rocket launcher to make a preoccupation. When he meets with Chi once more, she is being compromised by Kostov, who supposes she has sold out his men. Chi executes Kostov before he can pull the trigger. With Chi's assistance, Cord utilizes a lift to go to the highest point of the pinnacle and he actuates a link vehicle prompting an island. String investigates the docking zone, and he discovers Alexandria in a phone on the security level. String utilizes the fundamental lift in the complex to get to different dimensions. Line makes a preoccupation and enters level 1, where he embeds the unstable dash into the Super Computer. A cut scene is demonstrated that uncovers that Alpha has sold out him. In a transmission, she advises that chief Nagarov must be sure that Cord was not following up on her requests when he assaulted the refinery. She guaranteed Nagarov that Cord had not entered the office, however Nagarov had an account of Cord in the refinery. It brought about a basic strategy move and the British are presently working with the Volgians. As the reactor ends up basic, Nagarov and Lukyan leave the room. Until this minute, the diversion has occurred in Cord's memory, as he was cross examined by Nagarov in the wake of being caught, however starting here on it happens progressively. 

At the point when Cord awakens, he discovers Chi who was told to murder him, however she chooses to free him after a discussion. String and Chi head for the quayside at level 1 and figure out how to bring down an extension prompting a helicopter. After they free Alexandria, they fly away as the base is devastated. After they detect Nagarov's atomic submarine, they arrive on it. Rope and Chi investigate the submarine to keep the rocket from being propelled. They deal with the gatekeepers, and hear messages about issues with the reactor. After they split up, Lukyan thumps Chi down and takes her to a lower level. Lukyan later ambushes Cord, however he figures out how to execute him by pushing him into a turbine. In the extension room, Nagarov enters equipped with a weapon, and after their discussion, Cord hits Nagarov with a stepping stool. Rope utilizes two keys he found to prematurely end the rocket dispatch. In the wake of discharging Chi, a message is heard that there is just a single moment left to a basic reactor disappointment. They come back to the deck and are gotten by Alexandria in the helicopter just before the submarine detonates. At last grouping, Cord telephones Alpha and discloses to her that he has dumped his data about her arrangement with Nagarov on the Chinese and American knowledge nets. The diversion closes appearing, Chi, and Alexandria moving toward a shoreline where the sun sets. 

After the sudden accomplishment of the initial two "Broken Sword" amusements on the PlayStation, Sony reached Revolution Software to build up a diversion to be discharged at first on the support. Transformation needed to move far from the style of its past activities, making a diversion with a mystery operator subject and set in an activity situation. As per official maker Charles Cecil, the amusement was motivated by wrongdoing films "Mash Fiction" and "The Usual Suspects". The diversion motor was composed explicitly for the title. "Without blinking" was discharged on 14 July and 10 October 2000 in Europe, and on 25 March and 30 May 2001 in North America for the PlayStation and Microsoft Windows. While the PlayStation adaptation is never again accessible for procurement, the PC form can be bought at GOG.com. 

As indicated by Tony Warriner of Revolution Software, "Without a second thought" was a business achievement. The organization announced over 220,000 offers of its PlayStation version in Europe alone amid "the initial couple of months" of its discharge. In January 2001, Warriner noticed that its PlayStation rendition "truly progressed nicely", and that its PC SKU had sold acceptably. That March, GameSpy's Mark Asher composed that the amusement was additionally "selling admirably in the U.S. (doing around 100,000 duplicates) and improving in Europe." PC Data recorded 28,159 North American retail deals for the diversion's PC form amid 2001, and 5,825 amid the initial a half year of 2002. 

The PC adaptation of "Without blinking" got "normal" audits as indicated by computer game survey aggregator Metacritic. Experience Classic Gaming expressed that, however the diversion makes them disturb "defects," it "can be very beguiling to play on the off chance that you try to encounter the rush of being a cutting edge spy invading a foe fortress in an outside land," and that it "presents a not too bad story and intriguing characters set in a substitute truth of virus war secret activities." GameSpot applauded the amusement's story and said that the voice acting and music is "incredible" and that the amusement can "likewise be clever," yet expressed that the diversion is "very flimsy in both activity and experience" and furthermore condemned certain components of the ongoing interaction. "The individuals who need activity rather than fiction will locate the amusement to some degree dull, yet the individuals who welcome a unique story and extraordinary environment will discover "Without blinking" to be a fantastic mix of undercover work and sci-fi." Game Over Online reprimanded the diversion's ongoing interaction, however commended its "strong story which really bodes well" and its "generally excellent designs." 

GameVortex positioned the diversion as the "Top Pick," and applauded its designs, sound, story and riddles. The commentator both adulated and reprimanded certain components of the ongoing interaction, and stated: "The amusement's general feel and playability is exceptional." Game Revolution commended the diversion's "strong story, fair foundations and cool devices," yet scrutinized its "faltering movement, dreadful control and tasteless activity." IGN applauded the amusement's introduction, sound and illustrations, yet censured its interactivity, saying: "As an experience fan, you may appreciate the cool government operative storyline, and some of [the] all the more fascinating stealth components of the amusement, however activity gamers will wind up in a universe of interest, yet a world without test." 

The editors of "PC Games Magazine" named "Without a second thought" as the best experience round of 2001, at the end of the day gave the honor to "".