Bart Gets a &quot;F&quot; 

"Bart Gets a "F"" is the principal scene of "The Simpsons"<nowiki>'</nowiki> second season. It initially circulated on the Fox arrange in the United States on October 11, 1990. In the scene, Bart fizzles four successive history tests and the school specialist suggests that Bart rehash the fourth grade. Bart pledges that he will begin to improve and endeavors to get the occupant class virtuoso Martin Prince to support him, however after that reverse discharges, Bart appeals to God for help. That night, Springfield is hit with an enormous snowstorm and the school is shut, allowing Bart one more day to think about. 

The scene was composed by David M. Stern and coordinated by David Silverman. City hall leader Quimby shows up and the scene was the first to include another opening arrangement. "Bart Gets a "F"" was the third scene created for the second season, yet it was picked to be the season debut since it unmistakably highlighted Bart. 

Because of the accomplishment of the principal period of "The Simpsons", Fox chose to switch the show's schedule opening to Thursday at 8:00â p.m. EST where it would air inverse of NBC's "The Cosby Show", the main show at the time. Through the mid year, a few news outlets distributed tales about the alleged "Bill versus Bart" competition and vigorously advertised the principal scene of the second season. A few pundits anticipated that "Bart Gets a "F"" would do significantly more awful in the appraisals than "The Cosby Show". In any case, the last Nielsen rating for the scene was 18.4 and a 29% offer of the group of onlookers, completing second in its vacancy behind "The Cosby Show", which had a 18.5 rating and 29% offer. It completed eighth in the week after week evaluations, however was viewed by an expected 33.6 million watchers, making it the main show as far as genuine watchers that week. It turned into the most noteworthy evaluated and most watched program in the historical backdrop of the Fox arrange and stayed in that situation until January 1, 1995. As of now, it is as yet the most astounding evaluated scene ever of "Simpsons". 

The scene has gotten positive surveys from TV pundits and was positioned 31st on "Excitement Weekly"<nowiki>'</nowiki>s 1999 rundown of "The 100 Greatest Moments in Television". 

Bart introduces a book report at Springfield Elementary School on "Fortune Island", however all through his introduction, it is obtrusively clear that he didn't peruse the book. After school, Mrs. Krabappel discloses to Bart his evaluations have relentlessly deteriorated and cautions him around a forthcoming test on Colonial America, yet Bart does not focus, and puts off examining. The following day at school, Bart pretends disease and that night, Lisa cautions Bart he can't dodge his obligations everlastingly, however Bart calls Milhouse for the test answers. After school the following day, a presumptuous Bart turns in his test, just to get a poor score that is far and away more terrible than Milhouse's unsatisfactory test and have Mrs. Krabappel make healing move. 

Homer and Marge are brought in to meet with Mrs. Krabappel and school specialist Dr. J. Loren Pryor. Dr. Pryor says that Bart is an underachiever and prescribes that he should rehash the fourth-grade. Homer and Marge think about that keeping Bart down probably won't be such a terrible thought. Be that as it may, Bart is against this thought, and pledges that he will begin to improve and will pass. In edginess, Bart requests that Martin Prince help him get a passing evaluation. Martin is at first hesitant to support Bart, yet consents to do as such when Bart consents to tell him the best way to turn out to be increasingly prominent. The two young men at first help each other out, however Martin begins to take on a portion of Bart's poor character characteristics. He chooses to stop being a bibliophile and spend time with his new companions and play down to earth jokes, and relinquishes Bart. Left with brief period to contemplate without anyone else, Bart goes to God and asks that something supernatural happen to make him miss school the following day so he can have more opportunity to think about. That night, Springfield is hit with a huge snowstorm, and the schools are shut. 

Subsequent to accepting expression of the school terminations, Bart gets ready for a fun day off. Nonetheless, Lisa helps him to remember his petition, and Bart chooses to make great with God by considering while every other person is outside having a fabulous time. The following day, he completes the test and asks Mrs. Krabappel to review it right away. She does as such, giving him a 59, flopping by only one point. Bart separates at having fizzled in spite of every one of his endeavors. Mrs. Krabappel is at first paralyzed and endeavors to support him, yet when Bart thinks about his inability to George Washington's surrender of Fort Necessity to the French in 1754, Mrs. Krabappel is awed at this cloud chronicled reference, understands that Bart has put more exertion in and gives him an additional point for exhibiting connected information, driving his evaluation up to a D-, a scarcely passing evaluation. An euphoric Bart keeps running all through Springfield, shouting to individuals that he really passed. 

"Bart Gets a "F"" was the main scene of "The Simpsons" to be composed by David M. Stern. It was coordinated by David Silverman. Over the late spring of 1990, Bart's defiant nature was portrayed by certain guardians and moderates as a poor good example for youngsters, while a few American state funded schools restricted T-shirts including Bart by inscriptions, for example, "I'm Bart Simpson. Who the hellfire are you?" and "Underachiever ('And pleased with it, man!')". A few pundits suspected that the scene was a reaction to these contentions. Be that as it may, official maker James L. Rivulets reacted that it was not, yet included, "we're aware of it. I do believe it's vital for us that Bart does seriously in school. There are understudies that way. In addition, I'm exceptionally careful about TV where everyone should be a good example. You don't keep running over that numerous good examples, all things considered. For what reason should TV be brimming with them?" Sam Simon remarked that "there are topics to the shows we did a year ago, essential subjects, I believe it's a tribute to how well we executed them that no one understood we had a point." Bart says "Cowabunga" for the second time (the first run through being in "The Telltale Head"), which was normally connected with Bart through its utilization as a T-shirt motto. Civic chairman Quimby shows up in this scene, without his trademark band that says "City hall leader". The band was later included in light of the fact that the authors expected that watchers would not remember him. 

The scene was the first to include another opening grouping, which was abbreviated by fifteen seconds from its unique length of around 1 minute, 30 seconds. The opening succession for the primary season demonstrated Bart taking a "Transport Stop" sign; while the new grouping highlighted him skateboarding past a few characters who had been presented amid the past season. Beginning with this season, there were three variants of the opening: a full about 1 minute 15 second long form, a 45-second form and a 25-second form. This gave the show's editors more space. David Silverman trusts that the illustrators started to "make their mark" as they had become acclimated to the characters and had the capacity to accomplish more with character acting. Amid the scene where Bart conveys a discourse where he states he is "idiotic as a post", Silverman needed to cut from a few points in all respects rapidly to give a feeling of uneasiness. Martin Prince's plan was changed a few times amid the scene. There was an alternate model that had bigger eyes and more out of control hair intended for the scene where Martin double-crosses Bart and keeps running off. Silverman depicts the "Day off" succession as one of the hardest things he at any point needed to quicken. It includes a few long skillet which indicates a wide range of characters taking part in different exercises and was hard to time accurately. Bart's dream where he sees the establishing fathers of the United States utilizes quieted hues and varieties of red, white and blue. Silverman likewise needed to strive to make Bart cry without making his structure look too off-putting, and this is the motivation behind why he was demonstrated covering his face with a bit of paper. 

The principal period of "The Simpsons" had completed as high as fourth in the week after week appraisals and was the Fox system's first arrangement to rank among a season's best 30 most noteworthy evaluated shows and Bart rapidly ended up a standout amongst the most famous characters on TV in what was named "Bartmania". Because of the accomplishment of the primary period of the show, the Fox organize chose to switch "The Simpsons"<nowiki>'</nowiki> timeslot with the expectation that it would take evaluations from NBC's "powerhouse" line up, create additionally promoting income, and result in higher appraisals for "Beverly Hills, 90210" and "Darlings", which would pursue the show. The show was moved from its from 8:00â p.m. EST Sunday night opening to a similar time on Thursday, where it would rival NBC's "The Cosby Show", the main show at the time. A considerable lot of the makers of "The Simpsons", including James L. Rivulets, were against the move. The show had been in the main 10 while airing on Sunday and they felt the move would pulverize its appraisals. He remarked that "Abruptly a demonstrate that was a hit is battling for its survival, [...] We're not battling "Cosby", we simply need to get solid appraisals. There have been two weeks throughout my life when a show I was related with was number one in the appraisals, and on Sunday night, we got an opportunity to be the main show in the nation. I don't think we get an opportunity on Thursday night." 

"Two Cars in Every Garage and Three Eyes on Every Fish" was the principal scene delivered for the season, however "Bart Gets a "F"" publicized first since Bart was prevalent at the time and the makers had needed to debut with a scene including him. It circulated inverse the fourth scene of the seventh period of "The Cosby Show" titled "Time of Adjustment", which saw the expansion of Erika Alexander to the cast. The initial 13 scenes of "The Simpsons" had been rerun a few times through the mid year, and Fox intensely advanced the primary new scene since May, and news outlets distributed tales about the alleged "Bill versus Bart" contention. 

Reruns of "The Simpsons" which circulated in the Thursday schedule opening against new scenes of "The Cosby Show" were positioned as low as 73rd in the week after week evaluations (contrasted and third spot for "The Cosby Show"). A few pundits anticipated that "Bart Gets a "F"" would do impressively more regrettable in the evaluations than "The Cosby Show". Greg Dawson of the "Orlando Sentinel" composed that he would "wager dollars to plain-cake doughnuts (a Homer annoyance) that even a new Simpsons won't come extremely close to "Cosby", which could get a 30 share in a power outage." Fox official Peter Chernin said that they were planning to set up a toehold on Thursday night and that "in case we're extremely fortunate and exceptionally lucky, we're going to come in second spot." 

Early medium-term appraisals figures for the first communicate of the scene in 24 urban areas anticipated that "The Simpsons" had a 19.9 Nielsen Rating and 30% offer of the crowd while "The Cosby Show" had a 19.3 Nielsen Rating and 29% offer. Be that as it may, the last evaluating for "Bart Gets a "F"" was a 18.4 and a 29% offer of the gathering of people, completing second in its schedule opening behind "The Cosby Show", which had a 18.5 rating and 29% offer. At the time, NBC had 208 TV channels, while Fox just had 133. It completed eighth in the week by week evaluations, tied with "Who's the Boss?", while "The Cosby Show" completed seventh. The rating depends on the quantity of family unit TVs that were tuned into the show, yet Nielsen Media Research assessed that 33.6 million watchers viewed the scene, making it the main show regarding genuine watchers that week ("The Cosby Show" was viewed by 28.5 million, completed seventh). It turned into the most noteworthy appraised and most watched program in the historical backdrop of the Fox Network. It stayed in that situation until January 1, 1995, when a National Football League playoff diversion between the Minnesota Vikings and Chicago Bears accomplished a Nielsen Rating of 21.0. Until this point in time, it is as yet the most elevated appraised scene ever of "Simpsons". 

Bart's slapdash book report was on the Robert Louis Stevenson epic "Fortune Island", while Martin presents Ernest Hemingway's "The Old Man and the Sea". Later on, Martin makes comments about the forecastle of the "Pequod" in reference to "Moby Dick". Amid "Day off", the residents of Springfield sing "Winter Wonderland". The scene where everybody in Springfield assembles around the town circle, clasps hands and starts singing is a reference to "How the Grinch Stole Christmas!" "Thank heaven", the theme from George Frideric Handel's "Savior", can be heard when it begins snowing. 

The scene has gotten positive audits from TV pundits. The writers of the book "I Can't Believe It's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide", Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood, stated, "A breaking opener to the second season - particularly critical for the grouping in which Bart petitions God for school to be dropped the next day just to wind up banished from the following winter wonderland." Virginia Mann of "The Record" felt that it was "not as fiercely interesting as last season's best scenes, [but still] well-done, diverting, and, now and again, impactful." The scene was commended for its enthusiastic scenes. Tom Shales composed that the scene is "not just clever, it's contacting" and adulated it for its scenes where Bart implores, stating "There are scarcely any other stimulation appears on TV that get into philosophical issues even this profoundly. "The Simpsons" can be as attentive as a wrinkle browed Bill Moyers pontification - yet limitlessly all the more entertaining." Hal Boedeker of "The Miami Herald" felt that it "pulls off a finale that is keen without being long winded, delicate without being sappy. Regardless of the tears, the show keeps its edge. Furthermore, the manner in which TV normally spreads on the schmaltz, that is a significant accomplishment." Phil Kloer of "The Atlanta Journal-Constitution" expressed "The scene works admirably of accentuating the significance of considering without getting gooky. For all the discussion about the political agitation of "The Simpsons", the show here and there has snuck in a periodic message, as it does once more." In his book "The Gospel According to the Simpsons", Mark I. Pinsky composes that "Bart Gets a "F"" offers the most point by point depiction of the dynamic of petition on "The Simpsons"." Steve L. Case later incorporated the scene in his book "Toons That Teach", a rundown of 75 kid's shows that assistance show scriptural exercises. 

The scene was positioned 31st on "Stimulation Weekly"<nowiki>'</nowiki>s rundown of "The 100 Greatest Moments in Television", composing that it "remains as exemplary disrespectful family TV". In 2007, Larina Adamson, a regulating maker on "The Simpsons", named "Bart Gets a 'F'" as her most loved scene of the arrangement. In 2010 the BBC named "Bart Gets a "F"" as one of the ten most significant scenes of the show, calling it "astute and impactful".