USAHS Blanche F. Sigman 

USAHS "Blanche F. Sigman was a United States Army emergency clinic deliver amid World War II. The ship was finished in April 1943 as Liberty send SS "Stanford White. At the point when chosen for transformation to a clinic deliver, she was initially doled out the name USAHS "Poppy, however never worked under that name. Subsequent to being decommissioned as a medical clinic transport, she moved toward becoming U.S. Armed force transport USAT "Blanche F. Sigman. 

SS "Stanford White", named to pay tribute to American modeler Stanford White, was worked by California Shipbuilding Corporation of Los Angeles for the United States Maritime Commission (USMC) in mid 1943. Set down in March 1943 and propelled the next month, the ship was appointed to United States Lines, Inc. for dealer activity by the War Shipping Administration (WSA). "Stanford White" advanced from California to New York and from that port made one transoceanic round outing to Liverpool. 

In November 1943, the WSA assigned the ship to the U.S. Armed force, which changed over her to an emergency clinic dispatch. In spite of the fact that at first doled out the name "Poppy", she was rather named to pay tribute to First Lieutenant Blanche F. Sigman, a U.S. Armed force nurture murdered in real life in Italy. The emergency clinic dispatch was at first situated in Charleston, South Carolina, and made different voyages to ports in England, the Mediterranean, and France. After her homeport was changed to New York in December 1945, she made a few additional races to Europe as a clinic deliver, at that point changed over to USAT "Blanche F. Sigman" in April 1946. As a vehicle, the ship made various treks bringing home medical attendants and military work force before entering the National Defense Reserve Fleet in 1948. The ship was announced surplus by the Army in 1949, and sold for rejecting in 1974. 

"Stanford White" (MC Hull No. 738) was set down on 9 March 1943 on ship route 7 at California Shipbuilding Corp. (Calship) of Los Angeles as a standard Liberty dispatch. The ship was propelled on Monday, 5 April 1943 (a similar day as another Calship-fabricated Liberty, ), and conveyed 17 April 1943, taking 39 days from begin to conveyance. The ship was at first to be propelled on Saturday, 3 April, yet had experienced minor harm a flame the day preceding. 

Despite the fact that it isn't known where "Stanford White" went through the initial five months of her trader vocation, she spent the last two in the Atlantic. She cruised from Galveston, Texas on 12 September 1943 and landed in Key West on 16 September. The ship left that day for New York and landed there on 22 September. On 28 September the ship, conveying a general payload, joined a guard went to Liverpool, where it touched base on 13 October. After five days, the "Stanford White" set out for New York, landing back there on 4 November. 

In late November 1943 the ship was exchanged by the WSA to the War Department for activity as a Hague Convention medical clinic deliver by the U.S. Armed force. The ship put into the Todd Hoboken Shipyard at the Port of New York for transformation, staying there until fulfillment on 30 June 1944. The ship was at first alloted the name "Poppy", under the then-current approach of naming Army emergency clinic sends after roses, yet never worked under that name. The ship was rather named after First Lieutenant Blanche F. Sigman, a U.S. Armed force nurture slaughtered in real life on 7 February 1944 on the foothold amid Operation Shingle, the Allied arrivals at Anzio. 

In the wake of cruising for the Clyde and back to New York in July on its first kindness mission, "Blanche F. Sigman" moved to its new homeport of Charleston in August 1944. Cruising soon thereafter, the "Sigman" went to the Mersey and Liverpool. In October the ship cruised for Gibraltar, Oran, and Leghorn. In December, it rehashed its past voyage yet additionally ceased at Naples also, in the long run advancing back to Charleston in January 1945. All through 1945, the emergency clinic transport made six transoceanic treks, visiting Marseille multiple times, Naples, Oran, Gibraltar, Milford Haven, Wales, Avonmouth, Cherbourg, and Horta. The "Sigman"s 6th mission of it was an arrival excursion to Cherbourg that finished with an arrival to its new homeport of New York. 

From New York, "Blanche F. Sigman" made three visits, calling at Cherbourg for a third time, Bremerhaven multiple times, The Downs, and Le Havre. While in Europe amid the third outing, the ship was decommissioned as a medical clinic deliver in April 1946 and came back to New York with a heap of Army and Red Cross attendants, and individuals from the Women's Army Corps. All through 1947 and into 1948, the "Sigman" made various outings for the Army, basically among Bremerhaven and New York. 

On 22 November 1948, "Blanche F. Sigman" entered the National Defense Reserve Fleet (NDRF) at the James River in Virginia. Stacked with lasting stabilizer of pig iron and of solid obstructs, the previous clinic send sat in mothballs for a long time before being offered for transfer in late 1973. The ship was granted to Max Wender for rejecting on 23 January 1974 for $145,115, and was pulled back from the NDRF and conveyed to Wender on 17 May 1974.