Monica Reyes 

Monica Julieta Reyes is an anecdotal character in the Fox sci-fi otherworldly TV arrangement "The X-Files". Monica Reyes is depicted by Annabeth Gish. At initial a Field Agent before turning into a Special Agent with the FBI, she works with her long-lasting companion and accomplice John Doggett in the X-Files office, which is worried about the examination of paranormal cases, named "X-Files". Presented in the arrangement's eighth season, Reyes would turn into a primary character all through the whole of its ninth season, before returning for a solitary scene visitor appearance in the tenth season finale, and later in a repetitive limit amid season eleven. 

Because of their choice to proceed "The X-Files" TV arrangement and endeavor to speak to another age of watchers, the creation staff knew from the earliest starting point of season 8 that they would present another female character who might be an adherent, as withdrawing character Fox Mulder (David Duchovny) had been a devotee. Notwithstanding, the authors needed an alternate sort of adherent character to appear differently in relation to the doubtful idea of John Doggett, who had just been built up. The authors were required to make a character who was not normal for any of the biased principle characters that were a piece of the arrangement. This female character was at first named Karen Miller and afterward Jane Jones before the name "Monica Reyes" was chosen, named after a companion of arrangement maker Chris Carter's colleague who had a workmanship exhibition in Vancouver, British Columbia. 

At the point when the job was being thrown, performing artist Annabeth Gish got a call from her specialist, who educated her that the makers of "The X-Files" were searching for another female character. Gish connected for the part, yet her tryout comprised of a gathering with authors Chris Carter and Frank Spotnitz. Spotnitz believed Reyes to resemble Mulder in her hopefulness, confidence and satisfaction in being available to convictions, while as yet being to some degree diverse as she was increasingly profound and bought in to a more New Age-like view than Mulder had. Reyes was viewed as not the same as both Mulder and the other fundamental characters as she was fairly increasingly psychotic, dispersed, and eccentric. She grinned and giggled more than different characters, having a nature that essayist Frank Spotnitz felt was lighter, sunnier, more splendid, hotter and that's just the beginning "unmistakably hot". 

The character of Brad Follmer was made in season nine to give an affection enthusiasm to Reyes, as the journalists trusted the group of onlookers had to find out about her. In any case, Follmer's uncertain association with Reyes additionally served to uplift the contention among Doggett and Follmer, as the two men had affections for her. Depicting performing artist Annabeth Gish was satisfied that the connection between her character and Scully was like that of two sisters, as opposed to Reyes filling in as a foe to Scully. 

The ninth season scene "Hellbound", in which Reyes finds that she was obviously resurrected, started as a push to give Reyes or Doggett a "drive" or feeling of inspiration, as they were seen by the essayists as the successors to Mulder and Scully. As per the essayist of the scene, David Amann, official maker Frank Spotnitz was keen on giving Reyes "some murkiness to play" and her previous existence was thusly composed with solemn hints. 

Monica Reyes was brought up in Mexico City, Mexico, and talks familiar Spanish. She considered old stories and folklore at Brown University, and has a graduate degree in Religious Studies. In 1990, Reyes took a crack at the Federal Bureau of Investigation at Quantico, Virginia. Her first task in the FBI was serving on an exceptional taskforce researching Satanic ceremony misuse. Reyes at that point served in the New York City field office, where she turned out to be impractically required with specialist Brad Follmer notwithstanding the FBI's severe enemy of fraternization rules. Reyes was the head agent in the abducting of multi year-old Luke Doggett, child of then NYPD officer John Doggett. The kid was in the long run discovered dead, yet no suspect was ever captured. In 1999, Monica Reyes exchanged to the New Orleans field office. At some point after 2002, Reyes left from the FBI in a rush and chose to work for The Smoking Man as a twofold operator. 

In 2001, Reyes was reached by Doggett, presently a FBI operator doled out to X-Files division, to aid on a case including the vanishings of a few people who professed to be outsider abductees, just as the vanishing of individual specialist Fox Mulder. On account of her experience, Reyes thought about that these adherents may have just shaped a religion, however did not preclude the likelihood of outsider mediation. She remained with the case until after Mulder was returned by his abductors, yet came back to her field office before long. 

She later reached Mulder, who had returned to full wellbeing at the time, looking for help on a case she suspected had some connect to the homicide of Doggett's child. In any case, as previously, she before long came back to her own work. Reyes stayed with the New Orleans field office until she was called upon to ensure operator Dana Scully in May 2001, driving her out to a remote area in Georgia so the pregnant Scully may convey her tyke out of mischief's way. Reyes conveyed the youngster, and made a changeless move soon a while later, turning into Doggett's accomplice on The X-Files. 

Season nine sees Reyes join the X-Files consistently, working with both John Doggett and Dana Scully. Following a time of exploring the paranormal, Doggett and Reyes were most recently seen in the New Mexico desert in 2002, where they were cautioning Agents Mulder and Scully of the entry of Knowle Rohrer, a Super Soldier connected to the outsider pioneers. They were escaping the scene as dark helicopters demolished the Anasazi adobes where The Smoking Man had been living. The X-Files office was shut not long after the association of Walter Skinner and Alvin Kersh in Mulder's departure was uncovered; Reyes still remained with the FBI in some limit with regards to a period a short time later. 

Soon after the conclusion of the X-Files, Reyes was reached by the Smoking Man who had by one way or another endure his clear passing in "The Truth", yet at the expense of enduring decimating wounds. In return for her help, he offered her a spot among the overcomers of the End Times, who might be saved from the impacts of the "Simple" infection, controlled to the populace through smallpox inoculations. Presently, Reyes left from her profession at the FBI, choosing to take the Smoking Man's offer. She reluctantly spent the next decade helping him in his motivation with the Conspiracy of Men to build up a plan to drain the planet, planned to start in 2012. 

Following different episodes across the country connected to the Spartan infection, Reyes reached Dana Scully in mid 2016, willing to share the learning expected to build up a proper antibody. Amid their gathering, Reyes uncovered to Scully the conditions behind her partnership with the Smoking Man. She likewise uncovered that because of her kidnapping background in 1994, Scully would be allowed invulnerability from the Spartan infection. Reyes' new loyalties left Scully feeling briefly deceived. Be that as it may, Scully alludes to Reyes as a "confided in companion" when addressing Agent Einstein, saying "it's not very late to stop it" when they start chipping away at an antibody. She isn't seen again in the scene. 

In the eleventh season debut, it is uncovered that in spite of the occasions of the period ten finale "My Struggle II" being a piece of Scully's vision, Monica is as yet working for The Smoking Man as one of his compatriots and as an individual from the new Syndicate. She secures her previous Assistant Director Walter Skinner at gunpoint and offers to shield him from the Spartan infection in the event that he discovers Mulder and Scully's youngster, William, first. 

In the season finale, "My Struggle IV", she contacts Mulder and Scully with data relating to their child, William, uncovering that she is working from within to guard them. She later shows up at the wrongdoing scene where William was most recently seen, and later takes The Smoking Man to Norfolk, Virginia where they have found him. Amid a showdown with Walter Skinner, she is shot and murdered. 

The character of Monica Reyes has pulled in blended surveys from commentators. Gish's depiction of the character has been portrayed by "Diversion Weekly" Ken Tucker as "brutal yet lithe". Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson, in their book "Needing to Believe: A Critical Guide to The X-Files, Millennium and The Lone Gunmen", felt that Reyes' presentation in "This Is Not Happening" was "fairly constrained", discovering her peppy identity inconsistent with the tone of the arrangement around then; Shearman and Pearson likewise felt that the general utilization of the character in season nine was "lethargic", with her readiness to put stock in anything bargaining the strain of scenes, for example, "4-D" or "Hellbound". In any case, Shearman considered the character's appearance in "Empedocles" to be "exceptionally cunning", while Gish's acting in "4-D" was depicted as "emerge". Composing for "The New York Times", Joyce Millman portrayed Reyes and her accomplice Doggett as "the Diet Coke of Mulder and Scully", alluding to their auxiliary standing. Individual "New York Times" essayist Caryn James felt that Reyes and Doggett were "drab", and "a shadow" of their antecedents, taking note of that "where Scully and Mulder's quieted sexual fascination connected them to the real world, Doggett and Reyes' science was nonexistent, even as dispassionate accomplices".