Bird Cash 

Hawk Cash (adapted as EagleCash), and sister program EZpay, are money the board applications that utilization put away esteem card innovation to process budgetary exchanges in "shut circle" working conditions. The United States Department of the Treasury supports the projects for the U.S. Military. The Federal Reserve Bank of Boston manages the projects for the Treasury, and they are being used at affirmed U.S. military offices inside and outside the mainland United States. The frameworks utilize a plastic installment card, like a credit or check card, which has an implanted microchip that tracks the card's equalization and interfaces with encoded card perusers. This technique enables warriors to buy merchandise and enterprises at U.S. military posts and containers, without conveying money, or deal with their own ledgers while on arrangement or in preparing. The program lessens the measure of American money required abroad, diminishes robbery, spares a great many worker hours in labor, decreases the danger of transporting money in battle conditions, and builds security and accommodation for administration individuals. It diminished or dispose of the requirement for money and cash orders. 

Initially created in 1997, the EZpay framework was conceived as a pilot venture went for inductees going into essential preparing, to lighten a portion of the pressure and cost of overseeing cash while far from home. Numerous U.S. army installations are organized like communities, where merchandise and ventures are accessible available to be purchased. Moving wages into money for making buys has customarily been a battle. The framework furnishes warriors with a development on their wages as the EZPay card, which they can use to buy merchandise and ventures at on-base shops and stores. Toward the finish of fundamental preparing, the card's parity would be changed over into money, and paid back to the troopers. The task was an extraordinary achievement, since it disposed of the requirement for bases to keep money available, and spared officers around $125,000 every year in banking expenses. 

Around a similar time, the EZpay framework was extended for abroad use amid the fallout of the 1992-1995 War in Bosnia and Herzegovina, where U.S. work force were sent on harmony keeping missions. Named "EagleCash", the abroad framework works correspondingly to the EZpay framework, however with the additional capacity of fighters to join individual ledgers to the card, enabling them to stack, and reload, without getting to their budgetary establishments back home. As 386th Air Expeditionary Wing money related administrator, Catherine Miles clarified in a 2007 article, "It resembles a gift voucher. [...] You can put as meager or as a lot of cash as you need on it and it originates from your financial records." Unlike standard charge cards, the Eagle Cash is overseen on-base, utilizing cluster handling which guarantees that the cards stayed helpful notwithstanding when associations with banks and credit associations State-side are disjoined. The framework was given across the board acknowledgment in 1999, just before the War in Iraq; it has since been extended to numerous army installations, for example, Camp Anaconda on the bleeding edges. 

For troopers, the advantages are direct, yet for the officers accountable for the framework the advantages are substantially more broad. Transporting U.S. money abroad costs the military a huge number of dollars yearly — amid the Iraq War, for each $1,000,000 sent to pay warriors in Iraq, it cost $60,000 in security, coordinations, and bolster expenses. It additionally dispenses with the requirement for the World War II routine with regards to delivering the Military Payment Certificate. The utilization of a cashless economy at military stores lessens exchange times, liberating work force from undertakings like stepping cash requests or checking coins — amid 9 months of the Iraq War, this spared around 5000 hours of preparing time for money related faculty. It additionally forestalls duplicating. 

Since the underlying appropriation of the EagleCash framework, it has been enlarged by ATM-like booths which enable warriors to add assets to the card without visiting the base's fund office. Initially, this prerequisite made long queues refill cards, decreasing the utility of the framework. The change to the stand framework, created by NCR Corporation, helped these issues and expanded the capacity of the framework to give simple money to warriors from home — "something we frequently underestimate, however for fighters sent on remote land, it has dependably been a test". Until this point, 3.2 million EagleCash and EZpay cards have been issued and used to process 16.5 million electronic exchanges esteemed at over $3.6 billion.