first Armored Regiment (Australia) 

first Armored Regiment is a shielded regiment of the Australian Army and is the senior regiment of the Royal Australian Armored Corps. Framed as a tank unit in the new Australian Regular Army on 7 July 1949, the regiment in this way observed administration amid the Vietnam War working Centurion tanks. As of now the unit is situated in Edinburgh, South Australia as a feature of the first Brigade. As a major aspect of the Plan Beersheba redesign, the unit has turned out to be one of three Armored Cavalry Regiments (ACRs) allocated to the Army's multirole battle detachments in Brisbane, Darwin and Townsville. Each ACR is outfitted with M1A1 tanks, ASLAV light protected vehicles, and M113 reinforced staff bearers. 

The first Armored Regiment was raised as an ordinary unit on 7 July 1949 at Puckapunyal in Victoria when the first Armored Car Squadron, which had come back from occupation obligations in Japan a couple of months sooner, was changed over to a tank unit. The development happened following the renaming of a hold unit of the Citizens Military Forces (CMF) of a similar name, which in this way turned into the first Royal New South Wales Lancers and its fight respects and history sustained by this unit, so as to reallocate the name to the tank regiment that should have been set up in the new Australian Regular Army. At first just a single squadron solid, arranging initiated to extend to full quality at the earliest opportunity under the direction of Major Cecil Ives. Formal connection with the Royal Tank Regiment (RTR) was perceived two years after the fact and the regiment received their regimental shades of Brown, Red and Green, which go back to the Battle of Cambrai amid the First World War in 1917. These equivalent hues had additionally been utilized by the Australian Tank Corps before the Second World War. 

At first the new regiment was outfitted with Churchill tanks, despite the fact that this was just an impermanent measure until Centurion tanks could be obtained. In any case, because of the apparent inadmissibility of the Churchill and the late landing of the new stage, the regiment was not sent as a component of Australia's pledge to the Korean War, despite the fact that various officers served on trade with British and US arrangements and the unit gave heavy weapons specialists and signalers to Australian infantry brigades as fortifications. The principal Centurions at long last started landing in June 1952, with the regiment getting 39 tanks. With the quantities of normal staff relentlessly developing, it was conceivable to raise Regimental Headquarters, Headquarters Squadron and B Squadron, and the regiment was completely raised by 8 September 1952 under the order of Lieutenant Colonel Stuart Graham. 

In the interim, in September 1952 another tank squadron was raised. This was known as Nucleus Squadron and, situated in Holsworthy, New South Wales, with the motivation behind framing the premise of a second tank unit which was to be named the second Armored Regiment. In 1954 the regiment got it first Ferret MK 1 Scout Car, empowering the raising of Reconnaissance Troop. The next year first Armored Regiment got the Saracen Armored Personnel Carrier, and it was as of now that the expectation to frame another tank unit was deserted, and Nucleus Squadron in this way came back to the regiment as its third squadron, assigned C Squadron. 

On 6 February 1956, the then Governor General, Field Marshal Sir William Slim, gave the regiment its Guidon at a Regimental Parade held in Puckapunyal. Additionally in 1956 the regiment was outfitted with the Centurion heavily clad recuperation vehicle, permitting the retirement of the Churchill recuperation vehicle. Following the development of the Royal Australian Armored Corps (RAAC) in 1960, A Squadron was disbanded, lessening the regiment to two squadrons, and most of its staff framed customary squadrons in the fourth/nineteenth Prince of Wales' Light Horse and the second/fourteenth Light Horse (Queensland Mounted Infantry), which were prevalently CMF arrangements. These squadrons accordingly turned out to be a piece of the first Cavalry Regiment, which was later redesignated the second Cavalry Regiment and thus gave the core to the recently raised third Cavalry Regiment. 

Amid 1964–65 the regiment gave the majority of the men to 1 Troop, A Squadron, fourth/nineteenth Prince of Wales Light Horse, which was therefore outfitted with the new M113A1 Armored Personnel Carrier and was conveyed on dynamic support of South Vietnam in May 1965. In October 1967 the Australian government reported it would build the span of the first Australian Task Force (1 ATF) at Nui Dat in Phuoc Tuy Province from a few infantry units, while extra supporting arms, including a tank squadron would likewise be added to the power. In that capacity in February 1968, C Squadron was sent to Vietnam, with an absolute quality of 20 Centurion tanks which would work intimately with the M113s of the third Cavalry Regiment. Be that as it may, two of the four tank troops were at first kept down until the Centurions had substantiated themselves equipped for working in the conditions. The tank squadron achieved full quality on 5 September 1968. Then, in May the regiment had again achieved full quality, with A Squadron re-brought up in request to meet the progressing operational responsibility. 

Throughout the following four years every one of the three of the regiment's operational squadrons in the end served in Vietnam, giving priceless close help to the infantry, especially amid the leeway of Viet Cong dugout frameworks. In spite of the fact that their incentive in Vietnam was initially addressed by a few, they demonstrated an amazing weapon in both offense and protection, and were in charge of restricting infantry setbacks. The Centurions had the capacity to travel through the field more effectively than anticipated and in spite of the fact that they were helpless against hostile to tank weapons and mines, their capability and stun activity decisively affected the war zone. In late-May 1968 the tanks assumed a critical job in the Battle of Coral–Balmoral. Involving blocking positions trying to frustrate a looming socialist hostile went for impacting the harmony talks, 1ATF sent two contingents from its base in Phuoc Tuy, hence creating Fire Support Base Coral north-east of Saigon, only east of Lai Khe on 12 May. 

Following a few regimental-sized ambushes on Coral which were effectively repulsed by the Australians with overwhelming losses on the two sides, 1ATF moved to set up Fire Support Base Balmoral on 24–25 May, north of Coral. The infantry were this time upheld by Centurion tanks which had been called forward by street from Nui Dat and had arrived only hours before Balmoral was exposed to a two unit assault. Following an extremely precise rocket and mortar torrent at 03:45 hours on 26 May, the base was attacked by North Vietnamese infantry. The assault was repulsed with overwhelming setbacks by the joined capability of the tanks and infantry. The following day the Australians at Coral ambushed various dugouts found simply outside the base, with a troop of Centurions bolstered by infantry wrecking the shelters and their inhabitants without misfortune. A second assault, again of regimental quality, was made against Balmoral at 02:30 hours on 28 May however was canceled after just 30 minutes. The North Vietnamese were soundly defeated—again by the supporting flames of tanks, gunnery and mortars—leaving 55 dead and brought about six detainees. Australian misfortunes were one executed and six injured. This execution exhibited the upside of utilizing covering in Vietnam, and while before the fight some infantry had questioned the helpfulness or need of the Centurions, after the fight the infantry disliked working without them. 

In February 1969, C Squadron was diminished by B Squadron. On 6–7 June, B Squadron was engaged with a furious activity amid the Battle of Binh Ba, a town north of Nui Dat. The assault started on the morning of 6 June when Australian tanks and APCs progressed with infantry from D Company, fifth Battalion, Royal Australian Regiment (5 RAR) towards the town which was being involved by the Viet Cong and North Vietnamese. As the fight proceeded, B Company, 5 RAR took up a blocking position to keep them from getting away. Amid savage urban battling the infantry were compelled to clear each house, while the Communist troops possessing the houses terminated on them from the windows and entryways before withdrawing into passages as the Australians passed. Each time the infantry were terminated on, the tanks would shoot a gap in the mass of the structure, through which little groups could then enter and clear the structure of any resistance. The battling proceeded for the duration of the evening, and continued the following day before the Australians effectively cleared the town, the greater part of which was decimated. One Australian was murdered and 10 injured, while socialist misfortunes included somewhere around 107 slaughtered, six injured and eight caught. 

In December 1969 B Squadron was re-assigned A Squadron, while in December 1970 A Squadron was thusly re-assigned C Squadron. By late-1970 Australia was starting to lessen its promise to the war and the extent of 1ATF was again decreased from three infantry contingents to two. The tanks, nonetheless, proceeded with tasks and were engaged with substantial battling at Long Khanh on 6–7 June 1971, just as various littler activities. The last components of the regiment were in this way pulled back from Vietnam in September 1971. An aggregate of 58 Centurions had served in Vietnam; 42 had endured fight harm, of which six were destroyed, while two crew members had been slaughtered in real life. 

The next years were horrendous for the regiment, and for the Australian Army, with the nullification of National Service after the finish of Australian contribution in Vietnam draining its solidarity to the point where preparing was seriously limited until it was fortified amid 1974. B Squadron was re-assigned as the Medium Tank Trials Unit in 1972 and in this way done broad client and specialized preliminaries to assess the swap for the maturing Centurions. In 1977 the Centurion was supplanted in administration by the Leopard 1, which had been chosen over the American assembled M60 Patton. On 21 April 1981, the Colonel-in-Chief of the RAAC, HRH The Prince of Wales, gave the unit its first Regimental Standard. In 1995 the first Armored Regiment moved from Puckapunyal to Darwin. 

On 13 July 2002, the regiment was given its present Standard by the then Governor General, Dr. Dwindle Hollingworth. On 26 July 2007, following 31 years of administration the Leopard was supplanted by 59 M1A1 Abrams AIM, with 41 being conveyed to the regiment and the rest of the vehicles issued to the School of Armor for use for preparing purposes. Seven M88A2 Hercules Armored Recovery Vehicles were likewise gained, two being conveyed to the regiment. The Leopards never observed operational administration, despite the fact that amid the 1999 East Timor emergency the regiment was put on reserve to convey in the occasion the contention heightened, while the regiment was not sent amid Australia's association in the 2003 attack of Iraq. Individuals from the unit later sent to Iraq and Afghanistan as Bushmaster PMV teams, while others have likewise served in East Timor and the Solomon Islands. Amid this period the regiment was the main fundamental fight tank unit in the Australian Army and was based at Robertson Barracks, in Darwin. Until 2013 it gave the premise to one of three battlegroups inside the motorized first Brigade, which included two automated infantry forces, one rangers regiment, one tank regiment, and a medium mounted guns regiment. 

As a component of the Plan Beersheba redesign, the unit has turned out to be one of three Armored Cavalry Regiments (ACRs) alloted to the Army's multirole battle detachments in Brisbane, Darwin and Townsville. As an ACR, the unit is furnished with M1A1 tanks, ASLAV light defensively covered vehicles, and M113 shielded work force transporters. Under the changes reported in 2011 and affirmed in the 2013 Defense White Paper, the three Regular Army units will be rebuilt somewhere in the range of 2014 and 2017 into three Combat Brigades with a comparable structure and abilities, each comprising of: a Brigade Headquarters, an Armored Cavalry Regiment, two Standard Infantry Battalions, an Artillery Regiment, a Combat Engineer Regiment, a Combat Service Support Battalion and a Combat Signals Regiment. In late 2015 one of the first Armored Regiment's two tank squadrons was exchanged to the Townsville-based second Cavalry Regiment, with 14 of the tanks migrating. In October 2017, the first Armored Regiment moved from Robertson Barracks in Darwin to RAAF Base Edinburgh in South Australia. 

From December 2017 the regiment was sorted out as pursues: