United States of Micronesia at the 2008 Summer Olympics 

The Federated States of Micronesia sent a group of five competitors to contend at the 2008 Summer Olympics in Beijing, China. The presence of the designation denoted the third appearance by a Micronesian group at the Olympics since its presentation at the 2000 Summer Olympics in Sydney, Australia. Three male competitors (Jack Howard in sports, Kerson Hadley in swimming and Manuel Minginfel in weightlifting) and two female competitors (Maria Ikelap in games and Debra Daniel in swimming) contained the Olympic group. None of the track or swimming competitors progressed past the capability round, and Minginfel set second to rearward in his occasion. There still can't seem to be a medalist from the Federated States of Micronesia. At the services, Minginfel held the Micronesian banner in the opening function. 

The Federated States of Micronesia is a gathering of somewhere in the range of 6,000 islands in the South Pacific Ocean that incorporates roughly 100,000 individuals. The country is made out of a few expresses that each encapsulate an unmistakable ethnic gathering among the island gathering, and lies roughly 75% of the route among Hawaii and Indonesia. After World War II, the Micronesian island chain turned into a United Nations trust an area controlled by the United States. The Federated States of Micronesia turned into an autonomous nation on 1986, yet uninhibitedly connects with the United States, which handles matters of protection. The Federated States of Micronesia sent its first designation to partake in the Olympics roughly 14 years after it turned into a sovereign substance, sending three men and two ladies to the 2000 Summer Olympics in Sydney, Australia. Among at that point and Beijing in 2008, three male and two female Micronesian competitors taking an interest crosswise over three games have showed up at the Olympics at each example. Preceding Beijing, there had been no medalists from the Federated States of Micronesia; no decorations were won by Micronesian competitors at the Beijing diversions either. Up to and including the Beijing Olympics, weightlifter Manuel Minginfel had been the flagbearer for Micronesia at each opening function. 

At the Beijing recreations, the most youthful competitor was swimmer Debra Daniel, who was 17 years of age. The oldest was Minginfel at age 29. Of the assignment, the special case who had been to various Olympic amusements was Minginfel. 

Jack Howard spoke to the Federated States of Micronesia as its solitary male track competitor at the Beijing Olympics. He contended in the men's 100â meters races. Conceived in the island of Weno in the Chuuk Lagoon alongside his twin sibling John Howard, Jack Howard was conceived in July 1981 and was 27 years of age when he contended in Beijing. Howard had not recently contended at any Olympic diversions. Howard contended in warmth seven against seven different competitors in the capability round of the occasion on August 14. He completed the race in 11.03â seconds, positioning seventh in his warmth; he set in front of Gordon Heather of the Cook Islands (11.41â seconds) and quickly behind Monaco's Sebastien Gattuso (10.70â seconds) in a warmth driven by Qatar's Samuel Francis (10.40â seconds) and Trinidad and Tobago's Marc Burns (10.46â seconds). Generally speaking, 80 contenders participated in the capability round of the occasion. Howard positioned 66th. Of the 80 contenders to contend the main 41 fit the bill for the second round and, accordingly, Howard did not progress to later adjusts. 

Maria Epiph Ikelap contended on the Federated States of Micronesia's sake at the Beijing Olympics in the ladies' 100â meters races. Conceived in 1987 in Weno, an island in the archipelago of Chuuk, Ikelap was 21 years of age at the season of her investment in the 2008 Olympics. Ikelap had not recently contended in any Olympic recreations. Amid the capability round of her occasion, which occurred on August 15, Ikelap contended in the ninth warmth against eight different competitors. She completed the race in 13.73â seconds, finishing off with eighth spot. Lao's Philaylack Sackpaseuth positioned promptly behind Ikelap (13.86â seconds), while Yemen's Waseelah Saad positioned quickly ahead (13.60â seconds). The warmth itself was driven by Russia's Evgeniya Polyakova (11.24â seconds) and Barbados' Jade Bailey (11.46â seconds). Of the 85 rivals in the occasion's initially round, Ikelap positioned 80th and, in this manner, that was the finish of her opposition. 

Kerson Hadley spoke to the Federated States of Micronesia as its solitary male swimmer contending in the Beijing Olympics. Hadley participated in the men's 50â meters free-form race. He was conceived in May 1989, and was 19 years of age when he showed up in Beijing for his races. Hadley had not recently contended at any Olympic diversions. The starter round for the men's 50â meters free-form occurred on August 14, with Hadley in the eight-man fifth warmth. With a period of 25.34â seconds, Hadley completed fifth, uprooting John Kamyuka of Botswana (25.54â seconds) yet falling behind Andrey Molchanov of Turkmenistan (25.02â seconds). The warmth was driven by Cameroon's Alain Brigion Tobe (24.53â seconds) and Sidni Hoxha of Albania (24.56â seconds). Of the 97 individuals who contended in the occasion's fundamental round, Hadley positioned 70th. He didn't progress to later adjusts. 

Debra Daniel, Federated States of Micronesia's most youthful rival at the Beijing diversions, spoke to the Federated States of Micronesia at Beijing as its solitary female swimmer, as she was a rival in the ladies' 50â meters free-form occasion. Conceived in March 1991, Daniel was 17 years of age when she touched base in Beijing to contend at the 2008 Summer Olympics. Daniel had not recently contended at any Olympic amusements. The primer round of her occasion occurred on August 15; Daniel was put in the third warmth against seven different competitors for the races. She completed in 30.61â seconds, setting fifth. Daniel positioned quickly in front of Tanzania's Magdalena Moshi (31.37â seconds) and promptly behind Julianne Kirchner of the Marshall Islands in a warmth driven by Ugandan swimmer Olivia Aya Nakitanda (29.38â seconds) and Botswana's Samantha Paxinos (29.92â seconds). Of the 90 competitors who completed the occasion, Debra Daniel positioned 76th. In this manner, Daniel did not progress to later adjusts. 

Manuel Minginfel was the main weightlifter at the Beijing Olympics who contended under the standard of the Federated States of Micronesia. He took an interest in the men's featherweight class, which incorporates competitors of 62â kilograms and underneath. Conceived in Yap, Minginfel was 21 years of age when he previously contended at the 2000 Summer Olympics in Sydney, Australia. In spite of the fact that he was unfit to effectively lift any grabs at those diversions, Minginfel completed in his occasion when at the 2004 Summer Olympics in Athens, Greece, at 25 years of age. The Micronesian competitor was 29 years of age when he came back to the Olympics for the third time in 2008. Over the span of his occasion, which occurred on August 11, Minginfel was the main Oceanian contending with 16 different competitors. While on the grab stage, Minginfel effectively lifted 115â kilograms on his first endeavor and 120â kilograms on his second endeavor, however neglected to lift 123â kilograms on his third attempt. In any case, he prevailing in the majority of his quick lifts, and effectively lifted 145â kilograms; 150â kilograms; at that point 155â kilograms. His last score, which consolidates his most noteworthy lifted load from the grab and quick lift classifications, was 275â kilograms. Of the 12 competitors who completed the occasion, Minginfel positioned eleventh in front of Canadian weightlifter Jasvir Singh (266â kilograms) and behind Henadzy Makhveyenia of Belarus (278â kilograms). In correlation, gold medalist Zhang Xiangxiang of China lifted a consolidated aggregate of 319â kilograms.