Bart the Daredevil 

"Bart the Daredevil" is the eighth scene of "The Simpsons" second season. It initially publicized on the Fox organize in the United States on December 6, 1990. It was composed by Jay Kogen and Wallace Wolodarsky and coordinated by Wes Archer. In the scene, the Simpsons go to a beast truck rally that highlights popular thrill seeker Lance Murdock. Bart quickly winds up enchanted and concludes that he needs to turn into a thrill seeker too. Bart's first trick finishes in damage, and notwithstanding the family and Dr. Hibbert's earnest attempts, he keeps on endeavoring stunts. 

Bart chooses to bounce the Springfield gorge, however Homer finds out about Bart's arrangement and makes him guarantee not to hop it. Nonetheless, Bart breaks his guarantee and goes to bounce the canyon. Prior to the demonstration, however, Homer stops him in the nick of time and gets Bart to swear that he will quit being an adrenaline junkie. 

Arrangement maker Matt Groening said that the scene is his most loved of the arrangement, and it is likewise considered among the arrangement's best by TV faultfinders. 

The Simpson family goes to a beast truck rally including Truck-o-Saurus, a mammoth mechanical dinosaur which smashes their vehicle. The rally's terrific finale includes a shocking trick by unbelievable thrill seeker, Lance Murdock. Despite the fact that the demonstration leaves Murdock seriously harmed and hospitalized, Bart is captivated by his execution and dreams of turning into a thrill seeker. 

Bart harms himself while endeavoring to hop over the family vehicle on his skateboard. At the medical clinic, Dr. Julius Hibbert demonstrates Bart a ward loaded with kids who have been harmed from endeavoring stunts. In any case, Bart is determined and keeps on pursueing his adrenaline junkie enthusiasm by bouncing over a pool and Homer on his lounger. 

On a class excursion to Springfield Gorge, Bart reports that the next Saturday, he will hop the chasm on his skateboard. Lisa convinces Bart to visit the medical clinic to see Murdock, trusting he will work him out of the risky trick. Be that as it may, Murdock urges Bart to proceed on his heritage. Bart intends to do it against the desires of Homer, who demands it is excessively risky. 

Indeed, even after a discipline, a few requests, and a "genuine talk" with Homer, Bart still goes to the canyon. As he is going to begin his trick, Homer touches base at last and chooses to hop the canyon himself to demonstrate to him what it resembles to see a relative pointlessly taking a chance with their life. Bart, not having any desire to see Homer slaughtered for him, deserts his trick and guarantees to never endeavor to be an adrenaline junkie again. 

Be that as it may, when Homer embraces Bart to finish their compromise, the board he is on moves down a slope and flies over the chasm. At first, it seems like Homer will make it securely over, yet he loses energy close to the end and tumbles down the barbed rocks, logically harming himself, until he winds up in a sorry situation. 

Homer is transported into an emergency vehicle, which collides with a tree, making him tumble down the crevasse for a second time. He is in the long run put in a similar emergency clinic room as Murdock. 

The scene was composed by Jay Kogen and Wallace Wolodarsky and coordinated by Wes Archer. The character Lance Murdock depended on Evel Knievel, an American cruiser thrill seeker and performer popular in the United States and somewhere else between the late 1960s and mid 1980s. Kogen, Wolodarsky, and numerous different individuals from the "Simpsons" staff were aficionados of Knievel's tricks, and Wolodarsky named "Bart the Daredevil" as his most loved scene among the scenes that he composed for "The Simpsons", since it is "precious to [his] heart". 

Dr. Hibbert shows up on the arrangement in the scene. In Kogen and Wolodarsky's unique content for "Bart the Daredevil", Hibbert was a lady named Julia Hibbert, who they named after comedic performing artist Julia Sweeney (Hibbert was her last name, through marriage, at the time). At the point when the Fox organize moved "The Simpsons" to prime time on Thursdays to go up against the National Broadcasting Company's (NBC) top of the line "The Cosby Show", the composition staff rather chose to make Hibbert a farce of Bill Cosby's character Dr. Bluff Huxtable. 

The music video for the "Do the Bartman" single debuted after this scene. 

The scene has been referenced in various clasp shows and flashback scenes all through the arrangement. Specifically, the scene of Homer diving down Springfield Gorge has turned out to be a standout amongst the most utilized "The Simpsons" cuts. In the scene, Homer tumbles down the bluff on the skateboard, bobbing off the precipice dividers lastly arriving at the base, where the skateboard arrives on his head. In the wake of being stacked into an emergency vehicle at the highest point of the precipice, the rescue vehicle collides with a tree, and the gurney takes off, making Homer tumble down the bluff once more. 

In the season thirteen scene "The Blunder Years", when the family is endeavoring to discover why Homer can't quit shouting after he is entranced, Homer flashes back to his most prominent minute: bouncing the Springfield Gorge, just to be hindered by Lisa saying "Everybody's tired of that memory," alluding to the way that the scene has been referenced so often. 

The scene was first included outside of "Bart the Daredevil" in the season four scene "". At the point when the clasp is appeared in that scene, extra film is seen of Homer bobbing down the precipice the second time, and after he arrives at the base, the gurney arrives on his head. In opposition to mainstream thinking, the second tumble down the crevasse (finishing with Homer getting hit by the gurney) was not an erased scene from "Bart the Daredevil", but instead a scene energized solely for the clasp appear. 

The scene is likewise referenced in the season fourteen scene "Treehouse of Horror XIII", in which countless clones made in the scene tumble down the crevasse. "Bart the Daredevil" was indeed referenced in "The Simpsons Movie" when Bart and Homer bounce over Springfield Gorge on a cruiser, and when they arrive on the opposite side, the emergency vehicle from this scene can be found out of sight (still crushed against the tree). It is additionally referenced in the "Family Guy" season thirteen scene "The Simpsons Guy", where Homer and Peter Griffin tumbled practical in Kang and Kodos' ship and bounce the chasm amid their battle. 

Toward the start of the scene, Lisa, Bart and Bart's companions watch proficient wrestling. The Russian wrestler in the ring, Rasputin, is named after spiritualist Grigori Rasputin. The beast truck at the rally, Truck-o-saurus, is a satire of the Robosaurus beast truck. In the emergency clinic, Dr. Hibbert indicates Bart a patient that attempted to fly like Superman, and he likewise makes reference to the "three numbskulls" ward. 

Spear Murdoch is a satire of celebrated adrenaline junkies, for example, Evel Knievel and Matt Murdock, the change inner self of the Marvel Comics hero Daredevil. Bart's endeavor to bounce over Springfield Gorge is a reference to Knievel's 1974 endeavor to hop Snake River Canyon at Twin Falls, Idaho, with a Skycycle X-2. Bart showing up at Springfield Gorge out there depends on Omar Sharif's passage in "Lawrence of Arabia". 

In its unique American communicate, "Bart the Daredevil" completed twentieth in Nielsen evaluations for the seven day stretch of December 3–9, 1990, making "The Simpsons" the most astounding appraised TV arrangement on the Fox organize that week. To advance "The Simpsons Sing the Blues", the music video for the collection's lead single, "Do the Bartman", debuted not long after this current scene's first communicate. 

In a meeting directed by "Amusement Weekly" in 2000 commending the show's tenth commemoration, Groening named "Bart the Daredevil" his most loved scene of the arrangement, and picked the scene in which Homer is stacked into a rescue vehicle and after that drops out of it as the most interesting minute in the arrangement. Since airing, the scene has gotten positive audits from faultfinders. Michael Moran of "The Times" positioned it as the third best in the show's history. 

DVD Movie Guide's Colin Jacobson delighted in the scene, and alluded to its opening by guaranteeing that "any scene that begins with the splendor that is Truckasaurus must be great." He loved the respectable ethics investigated in the scene, and considered the decision an "extraordinary one", making it a "reliably fine scene". Jeremy Kleinman of DVD Talk considered "Bart the Daredevil" one of his most loved scenes of the period. He observed the adrenaline junkie scenes to be clever, yet in addition valued the scene's scenes with "genuine heart". Kleinman finished up by taking note of that the scene enables "The Simpsons" to stand separated from other vivified and no frills sitcoms by concentrating more on the connections between the characters than "only a diverting week by week plotline". 

Composing for the book "I Can't Believe It's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide", Jay Kogen and Wallace Wolodarsky noticed that "Bart the Daredevil's" succession in which Homer tumbles down the canyon is the one that "everybody noticed", that "he's getting much more moronic by this point." In his book "Doug Pratt's DVD", DVD commentator and "Moving Stone" donor Doug Pratt picks the scene as one of the most entertaining of the arrangement.