Erichtho 

In Roman writing, Erichtho (from ) is an amazing Thessalian witch who shows up in a few abstract works. She is noted for her astonishing appearance and her offensive ways. Her first real job was in the Roman artist Lucan's epic "Pharsalia", which subtleties Caesar's Civil War. In the work, Pompey the Great's child, Sextus Pompeius, looks for her, trusting that she will almost certainly uncover the future concerning the inescapable Battle of Pharsalus. In an abhorrent scene, she finds a dead body, fills it with elixirs, and raises it from the dead. The cadaver depicts a common war that is tormenting the black market and conveys a prescience about what destiny lies available for Pompey and his kinfolk. 

Enrichto's job in "Pharsalia" has regularly been talked about by classicists and artistic researchers, with numerous contending that she fills in as a direct opposite and partner to Virgil's Cumaean Sibyl, a devout prophetess who shows up in his work the "Aeneid". In the fourteenth century, the Italian writer Dante Aligheri referenced her in his "Divine Comedy" (wherein it is uncovered that she, utilizing enchantment, constrained Virgil to get a spirit from Hell's ninth circle). She likewise shows up in both Johann Wolfgang von Goethe's eighteenth century play, "Faust", just as John Marston's Jacobean play "The Tragedy of Sophonisba". 

The character Erichtho may have been made by the writer Ovid, as she is referenced in his ballad "Heroides XV". Almost certainly, the character was enlivened by the legends of Thessalian witches created amid the Classical Greek time frame. As indicated by numerous sources, Thessaly was famous for being a shelter for witches, and "old stories about the area has endured with stories of witches, medications, harms and mystical spells as far back as the Roman time frame." However, Erichtho's prominence came quite a few years after the fact, because of the writer Lucan, who included her conspicuously in his epic lyric "Pharsalia", which subtleties Caesar's Civil War. 

In Lucan's "Pharsalia", Erichtho is offensive (for example, she is portrayed as having a "dry cloud" hang over her head and that her breath "harms generally non-deadly air"), and fiendish to the point of heresy (for example "She never entreats the divine beings, nor does she call the perfect with a suppliant psalm"). She lives on the edges of society and makes her home close "memorial parks, gibbets, and the combat zones extensively provided by common war"; she utilizes the body parts from these areas in her enchantment spells. For sure, she has a great time generally egregious and horrifying acts including cadavers (for example, "when the dead are limited in a stone coffin [‶] then she excitedly seethes each appendage. She dives her hand into the eyes, delights at uncovering the hardened eyeballs, and chews the gray nails on a dried up hand."). 

She is an amazing magician; while she is looking over dead bodies in a front line it is noticed that "On the off chance that she had attempted to raise up the whole armed force on the field to come back to war, the laws of Erebus would have yielded, and a host—pulled from the Stygian Avernus by her awful power—would have done battle." It is thus that she is looked for by Pompey the Great's child, Sextus Pompeius. He needs her to play out a necromantic custom so he may almost certainly become familiar with the result of the Battle of Pharsalus. Erichtho goes along and meanders in the midst of a front line to search out a body with "healthy tissues of a hardened lung". She cleans the cadaver's organs, and fills the body with an elixir (comprising of, in addition to other things, a blend of warm blood, "lunar toxic substance", and "everything that nature fiendishly bears") to breath life into the dead body back. The soul is brought, however, at first, will not come back to its old body. She at that point immediately compromises the whole universe by promising to bring "that god at whose fear name earth trembles". Promptly following this upheaval, the body is vivified and offers a dreary depiction of a common war in the black market, just as a somewhat equivocal (in any event, to Sextus Pompeius) prediction about the destiny that lies coming up for Pompey and his family. 

Since the 6th book of "Pharsalia" is seen by numerous researchers similar to an improving of the 6th book from Virgil's "Aeneid", Erichtho is regularly seen as the "contradictory partner to Virgil's Cumaean Sibyl. Without a doubt, both satisfy the job of helping a human addition data from the black market; notwithstanding, while the Sibyl is devout, Erichtho is mischievous. Andrew Zissos notes: 

The tremendous good gap among Erictho and the Sibyl is pleasantly brought out by Lucan's record of their separate arrangements. While the Sibyl devoutly demands that the unburied cadaver of Misenus ("exanimum corpus", "Aen". 6.149) must be legitimately covered before Aeneas sets out on his black market venture, Erictho explicitly requires an unburied body (depicted comparatively as "exanimes artus", 720) for her endeavor. As [Jamie] Masters brings up, there is a reasonable association between Erictho's corpse and Virgil's Misenus. This encourages one further reversal: though the Sibyl's rituals start inside an entombment, Erictho's close with an internment. 

Experts, as Zissos brings up, contends that the Sibyl's directions to cover Misenus and locate the Golden Bough are altered and compacted in Lucan: Erichtho needs a body—not buried—but rather recovered. Numerous different parallels and reversals flourish, including: the distinction of conclusions about the simplicity of getting what is looked for from the black market (the Sibyl says just the underlying plummet to the black market will be simple, while Erichtho says magic is basic), the contradicting way in which those looking for data from the black market are portrayed (the Sibyl urges Aeneas to be brave, though Erichtho scrutinizes Sextus Pompeius for being apprehensive), and the modified way in which the powerful customs continue (the Sibyl sends Aeneas underground to pick up information, though Erichtho evokes a soul out of the ground to gain proficiency with what's to come). 

Erichtho is likewise referenced by name in the principal book of Dante Aligheri's "Divine Comedy", "Inferno": in Canto IX, Dante and Virgil are at first denied access to the entryways of Dis, thus Dante, questioning his guide and seeking after affirmation, inquires as to whether he has ever made a trip to the profundities of Hell previously. Virgil reacts in the confirmed, clarifying that at one point he had traveled to the most minimal hover of Hell on command of Erichtho so as to recover a spirit for one of her necromantic customs. Simon A. Gilson noticed that such a story is "unprecedented in medieval sources, and exceptionally tricky". 

Clarifications for this entry have proliferated, some of which contend that the section is either: an insignificant "hermeneutic creation", a deliberate strategy with respect to Dante to undermine the peruser's feeling of Virgil's power, an inference to a medieval legend about Virgil, an improving of medieval ideas about magic, a scholarly parallel to Christ's Harrowing of Hell, just a reverberation of Virgil's alleged learning of Hell (in view of his portrayal of the black market in the "Aeneid", 6.562–565), or only a reference to the previously mentioned scene from Lucan. Gilson battles that the reference to Erichtho fortifies the reality "that Dante's very own voyage through Hell is supernaturally willed," in spite of the fact that "this is accomplished to the detriment of the prior necromantically propelled adventure attempted by Virgil." Similarly, Rachel Jacoff contends: 

Dante's changing of the Lucanian scene 'recovers' the witch Erichtho by making her important to the Dantean Virgil's status as guide: she hence works as per the Christian fortune that controls the progression of the "Commedia"s plot line. In the meantime, the Lucanian Erichtho is both underestimated and subjected to a higher influence. In this sense, Dante's revamping of Erichtho likewise fixes Lucan's disruption of the first Virgilian display. 

Furthermore, despite the fact that it is an abstract erroneous date to associate Virgil to Erichtho, given that Lucan—the one who advanced Erichtho in literature—was conceived around fifty years after the demise of Virgil, this association effectively plays upon the prominent Medieval conviction that Virgil himself was a conjurer and prophet. 

Erichtho is likewise a character in Johann Wolfgang von Goethe's eighteenth century play, "Faust". She shows up in Part 2, Act 2, as the main character to talk in the Classical Walpurgisnacht scene. Erichtho's discourse appears as a speech, in which she references the Battle of Pharsalia, Julius Caesar, and Pompey. She additionally implies Lucan, asserting that she is "not all that evil as the pathetic artists [i.e. Lucan and Ovid] painted me." This scene promptly goes before the passageway of Mephistopheles, Faust, and Homunculus to the ceremonies that outcome in Faust's Dream Life Sequence as a knight living in a palace with Helen of Troy—until the demise of their tyke breaks the dream and Faust comes back to the physical world for the finish of the play. 

In John Marston's Jacobean play "The Tragedy of Sophonisba", which is set amid the Second Punic War, the sovereign of Libya, Syphax, summons Erictho from Hell, and he requests that her make Sophonisba, a Carthaginian princess, cherish him. Erichto, by means of the "influence of sound", enchants that makes her interpretation of the resemblance of Sophonisba; she thusly has sex with Syphax before he can understand her character. Numerous pundits, as indicated by Harry Harvey Wood, "have rejected [this scene] as repulsive."