Jan Willem Spruyt 

Jan Willem Spruyt (4 July 1826 – 8 September 1908), otherwise called Jan Willem Spruijt and Jan Willem Landskroon Spruijt (birthname), was a South African government worker, attorney and statesman of Dutch drop. Spruyt was government secretary (1856–1862) and a few times acting state leader of the Orange Free State, and state secretary of the South African Republic (1866–1869). 

Spruyt experienced childhood in the Netherlands, considered law, yet did not finish his investigations, and filled in as a teacher, before coming to South Africa. Here he rehearsed as law operator in private practice in both Boer republics. Not long after his entry he was additionally immediately joined up with the organization of the Orange Free State, and achieved a ground-breaking position as government secretary. In this limit he remained in for state president M.W. Pretorius a few times in the period 1860–1862. 

In the second from last quarter of the nineteenth century a few numerous Afrikaner legislators and government authorities served in both Boer republics. So did Spruyt, who completed his profession as state secretary of the South African Republic. 

Spruyt was the child of Jacobus Spuyt (1796–1839), a Dutch restorative specialist, and Antje Landskroon. Both the Spruyt and Landskroon families remained in a convention of therapeutic practice, and three of the four siblings Spruyt had were specialists in the Netherlands. Spruyt himself prepared as an attorney at Leiden University, however likely did not complete his examinations. He proceeded to fill in as a teacher in the town of Oosterwolde in the north of the Netherlands. It was here that teacher U.G. Lauts enrolled him for South Africa in 1851. Lauts was one of a gathering of Dutchmen, keen on the advancement of good training in the new Boer settlements in South Africa. In that capacity, Spruyt was one of the numerous Dutch workers that settled in the new Boer republics around the center of the nineteenth century. 

Touching base in Delagoa Bay on a ship with J.A. Smellekamp as supercarga – he later turned into a notable figure in South Africa – and his two travel buddies and individual transients, Hendrik van der Linden and W.P.J. Poen, he traversed the Lebombo Mountains in a bull truck into the Transvaal. In March 1852 Spruyt was designated teacher in the town of Rustenburg. In view of question among the Dutchmen in the Transvaal, all the more explicitly between Rev. Dirk van der Hoff and J.A. Smellekamp, who had now additionally settled there, Spruyt moved to the Orange Free State, where he set up himself in Bloemfontein. 

In Bloemfontein Spruyt functioned as agent of the Landdrost (1854–1855), and in that limit he went about as secretary of the Volksraad on two events (September 1854 and February 1855), likewise filling in as Government Secretary. On the quality of his abilities Spruyt was delegated assistant to the State President in September 1855. Before long, amid the sickness of Government Secretary Groenendaal, Spruyt again took up that position. In October 1856 he was named to the opportunity and succeeded J. Groenendaal as Government Secretary of the Orange Free State. Spruyt was viewed by his associates as an exact government employee, however as a lesser legislator and statesman, reason that he was not delegated Acting State President when State President Boshoff went on leave in 1858. Be that as it may, Boshoff trusted Spruyt completely, and he enabled him to speak to the administration in gatherings of the Volksraad on a few events in 1861 and 1862. 

Later Spruyt went about as State President amid the unlucky deficiencies of President Pretorius from Bloemfontein. Albeit general conclusion had it that Spruyt was a man of lesser characteristics, on his renunciation he was applauded by State President Pretorius as faithful and exact in his work. 

As government employee, Spruyt had an effect on the incipient state mechanical assembly of the Orange Free State. He planned the ensign of the state, and established the framework of the model express the Orange Free State was to progressed toward becoming in later years. Having worked in secretarial capacities for the State President himself (as representative), yet in addition as a hireling of parliament, the legislature, and the State, Spruyt left a reasonable imprint on the early organization and its association. Spruyt was additionally delicate to great work relations inside the state contraption, and spread an ascent in the authorities' compensations. In this he didn't succeed, be that as it may, and in the end the matter of the compensations induced his own abdication. Spruyt felt that his pay was lacking to live on with a family, and offered his abdication. 

After his abdication he set up himself as law specialist ("wetsagent") in Bloemfontein, and went about as distributer of the Dutch language week by week paper "De Tijd. Staatkundig Nieuws-en Advertentieblad voor sanctum Oranje-Vrijstaat" (The Times. Political Newspaper and Advertiser for the Orange Free State), begun by H.A.L. Hamelberg as a contender to the English language paper "The Friend". 

In 1865 Spruyt was proclaimed indebted, and he hence moved back to the Transvaal. Here the legislature of the South African Republic designated him State Secretary in November 1866 on the counsel of State President Pretorius. This arrangement kept going till 1869. 

In 1870 Spruyt came back to the Orange Free State and to private law practice. He set up himself in Ladybrand, a domain vanquished by the Orange Free State in the last Basotho War of 1867. His indebtedness continued tailing him, nonetheless, and as late as 1871 a portion of his assets, incorporating a structure complex in Rustenburg, were openly sold for a moment total of cash. 

Endeavors to recover an open position in the Orange Free State fizzled, and in 1888 Spruyt afresh came back toward the South African Republic. He was permitted to function as law specialist in the lower courts, and – being outstanding and famous – set up a fruitful law practice. Until an amazing finish he kept a solid enthusiasm for the undertakings of the state, particularly in land cases. 

In the last time of his life Spruyt lived in Troyeville, Johannesburg. He passed on while on a visit to Natal, matured 82. 

Spruyt wedded in Bloemfontein on 31 December 1856 with Elizabeth Emma Hanger (1826–1918), beginning from Peddie in the Cape Colony. The couple had five children and five little girls, Emma, 

William, Gerard, Victor, Henrietta, George, Rudolf, Alicia, Elizabeth and Catherine.