Speed Buggy 

Speed Buggy is an American enlivened TV arrangement, delivered by Hanna-Barbera, which initially broadcast for one season on CBS from September 8, 1973 to December 22, 1973. With the voices of Mel Blanc, Michael Bell, Arlene Golonka and Phil Luther Jr., the show pursues an orange human rise surrey who close by young people Debbie, Mark, and Tinker, explains riddles while taking part in dashing rivalries around the globe. The arrangement was created by Iwao Takamoto, official delivered by William Hanna and Joseph Barbera and coordinated by Charles A. Nichols. 

The arrangement was initially created under the working titles "Speed Bug" and "Speed Buggs" before it was settled as "Speed Buggy". Takamoto was less required with the arrangement because of the trust he had for storyboard and activity craftsman Bob Singer. The idea for the show was motivated by the 1968 Walt Disney Pictures film "The Love Bug" and the "Speed Racer" anime establishment. A few of the storylines and plots started on Hanna-Barbera's other enlivened arrangement "Josie and the Pussycats". 

"Speed Buggy" went on for one season with a sum of sixteen scenes. Notwithstanding its short run, it was communicated on the Big Three broadcasting companies a very long time after its unique keep running as the channels had acquired syndication rights. It was conjectured that the arrangement gained a fan base because of its continuous revolution on American TV. Basic reaction to "Speed Buggy" was commonly positive; a few commentators making the most of its mutual subjects with "Josie and the Pussycats" and "Scooby-Doo, Where Are You!", while others thought that it was bland and excessively tedious. It has since been discharged on DVD as a major aspect of Warner Bros.' Archive Collection on a four plate set. 

Set in a grouping of areas around the globe, the arrangement pursues three young people (Mark, Debbie, and Tinker) and a talking rise surrey as they share in different undertakings. Speed Buggy, the ridge surrey, was structured by Tinker and takes an interest in dashing rivalries so as to gather "champ's trophies". Amid their movements, the team frequently vanquishes reprobates and hoodlums so as to spare the world, for example, precious stone cheats, vehicle fixated specialists, and malice privateers. Known as the "Speed Buggs", the gathering of three youngsters can enact Speed Buggy using a convenient walkie-talkie. A few scenes in the arrangement include revamped renditions of storylines from Hanna-Barbera's "Josie and the Pussycats". 

The arrangement includes the accompanying four principle characters all through its run: 

"Speed Buggy" was created with the working titles "Speed Bug" and "Speed Buggs". The show's idea was somewhat motivated by the 1968 Walt Disney Pictures film "The Love Bug" and the Japanese "Speed Racer" establishment. It was implied by creator David Hofstede that the "Chugga-Boom" vehicle in Hanna-Barbera's "The Perils of Penelope Pitstop" filled in as a model for the vehicle in "Speed Buggy". Officially delivered by William Hanna and Joseph Barbera's Hanna-Barbera Productions, Charles A. Nichols filled in as the chief and Art Scott was the partner maker. Iwao Takamoto, the principle maker, communicated in his after death 2009 collection of memoirs that the making of "Speed Buggy" happened because of the achievement of his different creations "Josie and the Pussycats" and "Scooby-Doo, Where Are You!". He composed that his support in the arrangement was incompletely in light of the fact that he delighted in getting "[his] hands on a show at whatever point [he] felt it was important"; in any case, he was at last less required with the show because of his trust with Bob Singer, an activity craftsman for Hanna-Barbera creations at the time. 

Jack Mendelshon and Chuck Menville were the two head essayists for the scenes. A few different scholars added to the arrangement, including Lars Bourne, Len Janson, Joel Kane, Jack Kaplan, Woody Kling, Norman Maurer, and Larry Rhine. The principle title subject for "Speed Buggy" was copyrighted in November 1975; it was formed by Hoyt Curtin under the supervision of Paul DeKorte. Other than the main jobs, other voice performing artists required with the arrangement incorporate Janet Waldo, Hal Smith, John Stephenson, and Mike Road. 

"Speed Buggy" was communicated on CBS as a feature of their Saturday morning youngsters' lineup between September 8 and December 22, 1973. Before being dropped, it kept on airing routinely until August 31, 1974. After its unique run, CBS included reruns of "Speed Buggy" in their kids situated TV squares, it was communicated from February 4, 1978 to September 2, 1978 and September 18, 1982 to January 29, 1983. It additionally played on both ABC and NBC, when they obtained syndication rights for the arrangement. ABC publicized it around early afternoon in 1975-1976 and NBC broadcast it in 1978. As indicated by "The A.V. Club"s Will Harris, the arrangement was fruitful and had a huge fan base since it circulated on each of the three noteworthy broadcasting companies during the 1970s. 

Boomerang has communicated "Speed Buggy" on a few events since its underlying dispatch in 1992. As a major aspect of a Valentine's Day occasion in February 2007, the channel publicized the program close by different kid's shows, for example, "Tom and Jerry", "The Jetsons", and "Dexter's Laboratory". The scene "Speed Buggy Went That-a-Way" was highlighted on the Warner Bros. Presents DVD gathering "Saturday Morning Cartoons – 1970's Volume 1" and discharged on May 26, 2009. As a component of the Warner Bros. TV Distribution's Archive Collection, the total "Speed Buggy" arrangement was made accessible on DVD as a four-circle set. 

In review audits, faultfinders saw the arrangement as like the Scooby-Doo establishment. Aubrey Sitterson of Geek.com included "Speed Buggy" on their unranked rundown of "most loved Scooby-Doo knockoffs". He noted likenesses among Speedy and Scooby-Doo's "Secret Machine", and clowned that Tinker is "essentially only Shaggy in a jumpsuit". Nonetheless, he implied that "Speed Buggy"s achievement could have been gotten from its mutual storylines as observed on "Josie and the Pussycats". Likewise, Harris from "The A.V. Club" concurred and composed that the principle distinction between the two shows was that "Speed Buggy" "substitut[ed] dashing for shake 'n' roll". He likewise guaranteed that the fundamental character "confirm[ed] that sidekicks don't generally need to be creatures". "Speed Buggy" and the Scooby-Doo pack would be included in a hybrid scene ("The Weird Winds of Winona") in the second portion of the "Scooby-Doo" establishment, "The New Scooby-Doo Movies" (1972-1973). 

A few correlations were made between the show and different works made by Hanna-Barbera. David Mansour, writer of "From Abba to Zoom: A Pop Culture Encyclopedia of the Late twentieth Century", wrote in his book that "Speed Buggy" imparted a few attributes to Hanna-Barbera's "Scooby-Doo, Where Are You!". He theorized that Mark was the "Freddy-esque attractive mind", Debbie was the "Daphne-esque pretty sweetheart", and Tinker was the "Shaggy-esque repairman and driver". Besides, he considered Speed Buggy to be one the most "celebrated hill surreys of popular culture" close by the carriages in "The Funky Phantom", "The Banana Splits", and the Big Jim toy line. In a review perspective on more established kid's shows, the staff at MeTV incorporated the show on their rundown of "15 Forgotten Cartoons from the Early 1970s You Used to Love". On a progressively negative note, creator David Perlmutter discovered Hanna-Barbera's utilization of "adapted autos" to be excessively unsurprising and dreary. 

"Speed Buggy" would not be the last time Hanna-Barbera consolidated vehicles into activity. Both "Wheelie and the Chopper Bunch" and "Miracle Wheels" likewise included vehicles that had the capacity to talk and act like people. Perlmutter assembled the three shows, considering them a "set of three". "Wonderbug", an infrequent real life fragment on ABC's "The Krofft Supershow" (1976-1978), included three youngsters and a talking rise surrey and frequently attracted correlations with "Speed Buggy" and "The Love Bug". Additionally contrasted with the show was Adult Swim's "Mike Tyson Mysteries", with "Moving Stone"s James Montgomery considering it a tribute to great kid's shows like "Speed Buggy", "Scooby-Doo", and "Chief Caveman and the Teen Angels". 

The characters in "Speed Buggy" would likewise be included in a 1973 Milton Bradley tabletop game, where players would race Speed Buggy and different carriages in a fictionalized rendition of Baja California. Rapid would likewise show up in later kid's shows, including "Johnny Bravo", "My Life as a Teenage Robot", "Intruder Zim", "Animaniacs", "South Park", and "Harvey Birdman, Attorney at Law". 

In 2018, a refreshed rendition of Speed Buggy showed up in the DC comic book "The Flash/Speed Buggy Special".