Benjamin Church House (Bristol, Rhode Island) 

Benjamin Church House (otherwise called Benjamin Church Home for the Aged) is a Colonial Revival house at 1014 Hope Street in Bristol, Rhode Island, U.S.A. It opened in 1909 as the "Benjamin Church Home for Aged Men" as stipulated by Benjamin Church's will. Starting in 1934, amid the Great Depression, it conceded ladies. The house was shut in 1968 and turned into a National Register of Historic Places posting in 1971. The non-benefit Benjamin Church Senior Center was fused in June 1972 and opened on September 1, 1972. It keeps on working as a senior focus. 

Benjamin Church was conceived on February 20, 1842, to Elizabeth Luther and Samuel Church, a rich grain and flour trader. Benjamin was raised with his 12 kin on Mount Hope Farm and the old family ranch on Poppasquash. His two siblings manufactured houses in the Poppasquash Farms Historic District. In 1900, Benjamin Church drafted a will to accommodate the development of a home for older men. It opened in 1909 as the "Benjamin Church Home for Aged Men". 

The Benjamin Church House is a two-story clapboarded Colonial Revival finished with a hipped rooftop that has four pedimented dormers. Developed somewhere in the range of 1908 and 1909 from plans by Clarke, Howe and Homer, designers, the structure cost $21,000. The front of the house faces west towards Hope Street and will be and has an ell on the back side that measures . The front exterior has a symmetrical five sound veneer with the principle entrance in the inside, the entryway has sidelights and a semi-curved fanlight. The front windows are run of the mill twentieth century windows with six-more than one scarf and have spread wooden lintels and those on the principal floor have raised focus cornerstones. Anticipating out from the hipped rooftop are two dormers with shingled sides. The front exterior has a one-story patio that runs the length of the face with a half-hipped rooftop. The patio is upheld by six Doric segments that outline the inlets and has a wooden frieze with a triglyph over every segment. The yard has a straightforward wooden rail that runs the length of the patio and down the front and avoids, the newel posts are topped by little wooden urns. The edges of the fundamental piece of the house have wooden quoins. In the southeast corner of the structure is an inward patio secured by a quarter-hipped rooftop. The back rooftop is are two pedimented dormers, one on each side of the ell's rooftop and the third stack which ascends through the top of the primary structure. The house has a stone establishment, which reaches out to a full story due the slanting area and has an entryway in the back. The yard is upheld by block docks. 

The inside of the house is structured around a focal corridor with a restricted stairway with turned balusters and newel that goes to the third floor. On the two sides of the corridor are two expansive front banquet halls, each and having tall roofs. The back of the south receiving area is the previous lounge area that is associated by a wash room to the kitchen in the ell. Two little rooms are situated past the northern banquet hall. The second floor keeps up the focal corridor and stretches out into the ell, yet is cut up by a horizontal passage. Every "quadrant" housed two spaces for the inhabitants with extra rooms in the ell and the third floor has four extra rooms with the dormer windows. The third floor of the ell was utilized as upper room extra room. At the season of assignment to the National Register of Historic Places, the modifications that had been made to the house were portrayed as "minor and unnoticeable, comprising for the most part of adjustments to windows and dormers to give departure to fundamental emergency exits." The patio is accepted to be a piece of the first plan, yet it was noticed that on the off chance that it was a later expansion it would probably have been done before 1920. In 1969, the clapboarded storehouse toward the southeast was torn down to build more up to date lodging for the older. 

The Benjamin Church House was prepared to open on March 15, 1909 and filled in as older lodging for just matured men. In 1934, amid the Great Depression, the leading body of trustees chose to concede ladies to the house. Samuel P. Colt would hand down $25,000 to the home upon his demise in 1921. The house was shut from 1968 until 1973 and vandalized amid the period, but at the same time was submitted and affirmed to the National Register of Historic Places. At some point in 1972, the National Park Service endorsed an allow of $5,000 to restore the house. In June 1972, "[t]he Benjamin Church Senior Center was consolidated as a non-benefit association that was housed in [t]he Benjamin Church Home" and opened for inhabitance on September 1, 1972. As indicated by the Benjamin Church Senior Center, the house is utilized as a senior focus and is controlled by volunteers and board individuals. 

The Benjamin Church House is truly noteworthy as an "unadulterated precedent" of the Colonial Revival style by noted neighborhood draftsmen Clarke, Howe and Homer. The house likewise fills in as an essential resource for the Bristol condition as an older home, noted amid its opportunity at the season of its assignment. The selection states "[i]t is a result of the ecological and structural significance of this house and its criticalness in the more prominent setting of the Bristol-Warren memorable areas that it is believed to be deserving of National Register status and assurance." It was added to the National Register of Historic Places on September 22, 1971.