Extra large Homer 

"Extra large Homer" is the seventh scene of "The Simpsons"<nowiki>'</nowiki> seventh season. It initially publicized on the Fox organize in the United States on November 5, 1995. In the scene, Homer loathes the atomic plant's new exercise program, and chooses to pick up so as to guarantee a handicap and work at home. 

The scene was composed by Dan Greaney and coordinated by Jim Reardon. Joan Kenley makes her second of three visitor appearances on "The Simpsons" in the scene as the voice of the phone woman. It highlights social references to the world's heaviest twins, the 1993 film "What's Eating Gilbert Grape", and the soda pop Tab. Since airing, the scene has gotten positive audits from fans and TV commentators, and "Realm" named it the best scene of the arrangement. It obtained a Nielsen rating of 10.0, and was the third most noteworthy appraised appear on the Fox arrange that week. 

Mr. Consumes sorts out a morning exercises program at the atomic power plant, to the terrify of Homer. In the wake of discovering that a representative who is incapacitated can telecommute, Homer fruitlessly endeavors to harm himself. After discovering that workers who gauge or more qualify as handicapped, he starts eating too much, regardless of Marge and Lisa's rehashed alerts that he is imperiling his wellbeing. With Bart and Dr Nick's assistance, Homer gains the 61 pounds expected to achieve 300 and Mr. Consumes introduces a stay-at-home work terminal in the Simpson house. Marge is compelled to concede that she is getting herself less pulled in to Homer in light of his expanded weight, yet he promises to demonstrate her he can be a superior specialist as a result of it. 

Albeit Homer ends up being capable at his specific type of employment, he before long starts to feel worn out on his duties as a wellbeing controller and basically turns to composing "yes" each time the framework prompts him. Searching for alternate ways, he leaves his terminal with a drinking winged animal to press the Y key to designate "yes" on the console and heads out to the motion pictures. In the wake of being denied confirmation because of his weight, Homer comes back to find that his feathered creature has fallen over and an atomic emergency is fast approaching except if the framework is physically closed down. 

Fruitless at calling the plant as his fingers have become excessively fat and getting himself too overwhelming to even think about driving or skateboard, Homer needs to turn to bumming a ride. Seizing a frozen yogurt truck, Homer touches base at the power plant amid an exercise program and achieves the shutdown catch, however falls onto the gas stockpiling tank, obstructing the discharge tube with the larger than usual lower half of his body, in this way forestalling a blast. Appreciative, Mr. Consumes gives Homer an award for grit and offers him any solicitation he needs. Homer takes a gander at Marge and in the wake of acknowledging how troublesome his weight has made life for his family, requests Burns to make him slight once more. He concurs yet after a fizzled endeavor at exercises, Burns chooses to pay for him to experience liposuction a lot to Homer’s amuse. 

"Extra large Homer" was composed by Dan Greaney, and coordinated by Jim Reardon. It was the principal scene Greaney composed for "The Simpsons". Preceding this scene he was functioning as a legal advisor and was thinking about moving to Ukraine to work for a new business. He said that this scene "spared" him from doing as such. Greaney pitched a few plans to the composition staff, however none of them were palatable, so then-show sprinter Bill Oakley gave him the thought for this scene. Oakley had Greaney come to Hollywood to compose it, and when Greaney demonstrated the principal draft to the staff, they loved it, so Oakley procured him. 

The authors needed the title of the scene to make Homer sound pleased about his weight, so they chose to name it "Extra large Homer". Greaney truly delighted in chipping away at the scene since Homer is continually cheerful and objective arranged in it, rather than being a lazy pig who is "eating constantly". Artist David Silverman structured the hefty Homer for the scene. There was an exchange about what Homer would wear when he wound up fat, and they chose to run with a muumuu. The essayists were likewise examining about how they were going to treat Homer's corpulence. They didn't need Homer to put on a show of being a "hoard", so they chose that the watcher ought to scarcely observe him eating after he achieves his 300 pounds objective. As the journalists were attempting to make sense of an approach to get Homer back to his old load before the finish of the scene, it was proposed that Homer should feel terrible about his stoutness, and in this way turned out to be slender for Marge, however that thought was rejected in early creation. Activity dolls dependent on hefty Homer were made for the World of Springfield arrangement not long after the scene had circulated. 

Homer has a fantasy in which he is remaining at the foot of a mountain with 300 pounds as the objective at the top. A pig wearing a tuxedo shows up beside him in the fantasy, and propels Homer to achieve the highest point of the mountain. This scene was propelled by the front of the "Sweetness and Light" issue of the National Lampoon magazine. The staff believed that Cary Grant would have been perfect for the pig in Homer's fantasy grouping, yet he passed on nine years before the scene was made, so they utilized cast part Hank Azaria for that voice. Joan Kenley visitor featured in the scene as the phone woman. The staff flew her down from Northern California to record her part for the scene. 

While Homer is in the garments store, two mannequins wearing comparable outfits and riding on bicycles are appeared. These depend on Billy and Benny McCrary, the world's heaviest twins who weighed over each. They got popularity in the wake of showing up in "The Guinness Book of World Records" in an image that portrays the twins riding their Honda cruisers. They would show up again in a similar season in the scene "The Day the Violence Died". The scene in which Bart and his companions watch the fat Homer through a window depends on a scene from the 1993 film "What's Eating Gilbert Grape". 

Homer believes that he can arrange the soda pop Tab by squeezing the tab key on the console, and winds up on edge when he can't locate the "any key". At the point when Homer vents gas from an atomic reactor, the gas demolishes yields of corn. A rancher says, "Gee golly, the corn! Paul Newman's going to have mama' legs broke!". This is in reference to the legend of Newman's Own popcorn items, in which Newman compromised any individual who may endeavor to take his popcorn. At the film, Homer attempts to watch the film "Sound If You're Horny", featuring performer Pauly Shore and on-screen character Faye Dunaway. 

In its unique communicate, "Jumbo Homer" completed 45th (tied with "Elegance Under Fire") in the evaluations for the seven day stretch of October 30 to November 3, 1995, with a Nielsen rating of 10.0. The scene was the third most astounding evaluated appear on the Fox organize that week. 

Since airing, the scene has gotten generally positive surveys from fans and TV pundits. In 2008, "Domain" put "The Simpsons" at the highest priority on their rundown of "The 50 Greatest TV Shows of All Time", and noted "Extra large Homer" as the show's best scene, calling it "A unimprovable blend of sharp discourse, amusing sight muffles and heart." Kimberly Potts of AOL Television named the scene the seventh best scene of the arrangement, while Michael Moran of "The Times" positioned it as the tenth best. "Extra large Homer" showed up on "The Star-Ledger"<nowiki>'</nowiki>s rundown of the ten best scenes on "The Simpsons" that speak to the comic and passionate extent of the show. The "Envoy Sun" put the scene at ninth spot on their rundown of the best twenty scenes of "The Simpsons", and featured the scene in which Homer is seen "laying hold of a frozen yogurt truck in a wild dash to the atomic plant to maintain a strategic distance from a looming emergency". Todd VanDerWerff of "Inclination Magazine" named the scene the show's fifth best, expressing "while there are a great deal of entertaining jokes in this scene (counting Homer's fingers that are too fat to even consider dialing), the best thing about it is seeing Homer, gauging admirably more than 300 pounds, wearing a muumuu and a 'chubby person cap.' The peak is somewhat constrained and animation y...but Homer's weight gain works so well outwardly that the scene pulls off much more than it may." 

Dave Foster of DVD Times stated: "The joy to which [Homer] takes to the test and the eagerness which Bart conveys to the venture demonstrate these two truly do associate when the circumstance is quite wrong, and the technique in which the essayists handle the not-generally so-clear drawbacks to such a handicap are both grown-up and adroitly diverting." Jennifer Malkowski of DVD Verdict considered the best piece of the scene to be amid Homer's shopping trek to The Vast Waistband. The site finished up its audit by giving the scene an evaluation of A. DVD Movie Guide's Colin Jacobson appreciated the scene and called it "one of the arrangement's progressively negative scenes", and said that it "pours on the giggles". He proceeded by saying, "It's diverting to see Homer's quest for stoutness, and it abuses his incompetence well. It comes up short on the normal softness about the predicament of fat people, however it makes a point about affectability in a downplayed manner." Despite the various snickers at Homer's appearance from the staff of "The Simpsons" on the DVD sound analysis for the scene, the writers of the book "I Can't Believe It's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide", Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood, expressed: "this isn't a standout amongst the best scenes. Homer's at his most chafing and infantile here—you truly need Marge to thump him." They included that Homer's jokes with the PC, for example, the scene in which he attempts to locate the any key, and Mr. Consumes running activity classes are the features of the scene.