Fuller Houses 

The Fuller Houses are two noteworthy homes at 339-341 and 343-345 Broadway in Pawtucket, Rhode Island. Built in 1896-1897, the two Queen Anne-styled homes were developed as investment properties for the Fuller family and are accepted to have initially been indistinguishable in development. The - story houses are set apart by an octagonal cove which contains the front staircase and a vast two-story yard anticipating totally from the house itself. For the National Register of Historic Places selection just a solitary unit was inspected, however the indistinguishable unit beneath is accepted to have experienced negligible changes. The other house, 343-345 Broadway, was not studied, yet has been all the more truly altered to take into account four loft units. The Fuller Houses are structurally noteworthy too protected and well-point by point Queen Anne-styled condo pads. The Fuller Houses were added to the National Register of Historic Places in 1983. 

The Fuller Houses were developed in 1896-1897 for Susan E. Fuller. Fuller's better half, Charles H. Fuller, worked an effective adornments discoveries firm. The Fullers possessed the houses until 1915, and proposed to utilize them as investment properties. The main individual from the Fuller family to live in one of the houses, explicitly 341 Broadway, was Alice G. Fuller start in either 1911 or 1912. The houses are situated to be conspicuously seen from their area on the east side of U.S Route 1 and from northbound traffic on Interstate 95. Despite the fact that not initially set in an area of such unmistakable quality, the development through the core of Pawtucket extraordinarily expanded the perceivability of these "I-95 tourist spots". 

The Fuller Houses are initially accepted to have been developed as indistinguishable - story Queen Anne-styled homes with both having their peak closes confronting the road. The southern flank of the structure is outwardly separated by a two-story inlet window with a gabled pinnacle. A semi-octagonal inlet on the northern corner of the houses shows the situation of the front staircase. A solitary story yard with a shed-rooftop overhangs the front entryways. A striking element of the Fuller Houses is the two-story roundabout patio on the southwest side. The yards are nearly expelled from the structure and finished with a cone shaped rooftop and ornamented with Queen Anne-style axle. The outside dividers of the houses are clapboarded and the highest points of the peaks have basic metal finials. 

For the National Register of Historic Places assignment, just the inside of one of the four units was reviewed, the second floor inside of 341 Broadway. This unit is gotten to from a winding staircase driving from the principal floor to the storage room. The second floor landing has a short anteroom before opening to two parlors. The front parlor is said to have had a drinking fountain which was expelled, yet the pipes is said to exist inside the floor. The back parlor has a Queen Anne shelf and prompts the lounge area with extensive floor-to-roof china storage rooms. Situated on the east side of the loft is the kitchen, storeroom and back staircase. The north piece of the condo contains two rooms and a shower. The NRHP selection expresses that the modifications to the unit were insignificant and all things considered, the equivalent would have been accomplished for the main floor unit. The northern Fuller House, containing 343-345 Broadway, has been all the more truly adjusted in light of the fact that it has been part into four units. In 2013, land data for 343 Broadway proposes the breadth of the changes to the house by posting the property as having 20 rooms, with 8 rooms and 5 showers. As indicated by Trulia the house was sold in 2010 for $140,000 and still in the four unit setup. A three-sound stuccoed carport dating from the 1920s or 1930 is utilized by 339-341 Broadway. 

The Fuller Houses are compositionally huge as a couple of two well-protected and well-point by point two-family Queen Anne-style loft "level" houses. The Queen Anne-style shaft work yards are unmistakable in the NRHP assignment as the most noteworthy precedents staying in Pawtucket. The two houses speak to a vital advance in the improvement of Pawtucket's engineering improvement and add to the city's visual character. The Fuller Houses were added to the National Register of Historic Places in 1983.