Flame Station No. 4 (Pawtucket, Rhode Island) 

Flame Station Number 4 or Fire Station No. 4 is a notable flame station situated at 474 Broadway in Pawtucket, Rhode Island. The structure truly has likewise been known as the Collyer Fire Station. The Queen Anne Style station was worked in 1890. It is a - story, hip-roofed rectangular block working with two block wings and a chime tower. Built of red block with sandstone trim and sandstone lintels and ledges on the windows, the structure has a foliate earthenware plaque bearing its name and date of development. The flame station was shut as a firehouse in 1974, when the present Fire Station Number 4 on Cottage Street opened. The inside of the structure was incredibly adjusted to suit workplaces and meeting rooms when of its posting on the national register. In 2014, the structure is being utilized by the Catholic Charities of Providence. Flame Station Number 4 was added to the National Register of Historic Places in 1983. 

Flame Station Number 4, otherwise called the Collyer Fire Station, (see building plaque) was built in 1887-1888 by H. L. Bassett and Co. what's more, F. L. Bricklayer on the southwest corner of Broadway and Carnation Street, in the focal point of Pleasant View neighborhood. The structure was finished and named in 1890. The primary square of the Queen Anne-styled red block firehouse is a - story, hip-roofed square shape with a cross-peak confronting Broadway. A couple of coordinating single-story wings with peak on-hipped rooftops venture from the long sides of the structure. The structure has little hip-roofed patios with angled openings on the fundamental passageway and Broadway confronting sides. In spite of the fact that developed of red block and pinkish mortar, sandstone was utilized for the window ledges and lintels and the station's trim. The structure has nitty gritty earthenware work, with a lavish foliate name and date plaque on the front peak and a string course at the base of the corbeled primary passageway. Over the plaque is a semi-roundabout window, and another round-headed window is on the northern side. The northwest corner has a square hose drying/chime tower that likewise has its own round headed window. Photographs of the structure are accessible here. The station has been altered; its two flame motor entryways have been evacuated and supplanted with present day carport entryways. The pyramidal rooftop on the turret which delegated the ringer tower was "as of late" evacuated at the season of its NRHP designation in 1983. The inside of the firehouse has been extraordinarily modified in the transformation to office and meeting room space when of its National Register of Historic Places designation. The enduring subtleties incorporated the Queen Anne staircase and indented board entryways. In spite of the fact that the inside has been incredibly adjusted, it didn't counteract its posting on the noteworthy register. 

In 1974, Fire Station Number 4 was supplanted by another Fire Station Number 4 situated on 397 Cottage Street. This was not to be the main substitution of the firehouses which would be reused through the Community Development Block Grant program, which aided the adjustment in the late 1970s and into the 1980s. When of its designation, the flame station had been re-purposed as office and meeting space for city offices. In 2014, the property was utilized by the Catholic Charities of Providence for Project Hope as a "Diocesan people group backing, area effort and social administration help focus". In 2017, another inhabitant, Rhode Island chapter 11 legal counselor John S. Simonian, turned into an occupant in the structure. 

The Fire Station Number 4 is structurally huge for instance of a late nineteenth century Queen Anne-style firehouse. The firehouse's distinctive element is the corbeled cornice and earthenware trim, yet additionally it is truly critical for instance of Pawtucket's development as a city. The limit for the property is recorded as Plat 7B, parcel 164 and incorporates the encompassing region, totaling short of what one section of land. Flame Station Number 4 was added to the National Register of Historic Places on November 18, 1983.