Foster–Payne House 

The Foster–Payne House is a noteworthy house at 25 Belmont Street in Pawtucket, Rhode Island. Worked in 1878, the two-story multi-gabled house is recognized by its clapboarded and outside woodwork and rich parlors in the inside. The property likewise has a coordinating carriagehouse with peak rooftop and vault. The house was initially developed and claimed by Theodore Waters Foster, yet it was sold to George W. Payne in 1882. The Foster–Payne House is compositionally noteworthy as a well-planned and well-safeguarded late nineteenth century rural living arrangement. It was added to the National Register of Historic Places in 1983. 

The house was worked in 1878 for Theodore Waters Foster, conceived on May 19, 1847, to Chauncey Foster and Ophelia Remington. He was taught in Pawtucket and joined the Rhode Island Cavalry in 1863. He served in the American Civil War under Nathaniel P. Banks in the Red River Campaign. In 1873, he shaped a gems fabricating organization with Walter E. White and Samuel H. Baily, named White, Foster and Company. After White resigned in 1878, the organization was renamed Foster and Bailey. Amid this time, Foster built the house and lived in it for a time of four years, driving to his place of business in Providence, Rhode Island. Encourage would keep on being fruitful in his gems producing business and his child, Theodore Clyde Foster, would succeed him upon his demise in 1928. In 1882, Theodore Foster sold the home to George W. Payne, the proprietor of the G. W. Payne and Company. 

Built in 1878, the Foster–Payne House is a two-story home with a low-pitched multi-gabled rooftop. The house has a solitary story open yard on the western side, a kitchen ell that ventures from the back and a solitary story narrows window that ventures from the western sound of the front exterior. The house is recognized by its clapboard outside and wooden trim under the peak tops, the window trim and the yard sections. There are three kinds of windows utilized on the house, single and matched one-more than one windows and two-more than two windows. 

The little lobby on the western passage patio prompts the principle stairhall that includes a delicately bending staircase with turned balusters and a bending rail. The main floor rooms are orchestrated in a "L" design on the southern and eastern sides with the kitchen set on the northern ell. The inside of one room, not determined in the NRHP assignment, has been modified with a squeezed tin roof. The second floor of the house was not depicted in the NRHP selection. The inside of the rooms show late Victorian subtleties, with the front parlor having a cut marble mantlepiece, a formed focal roof emblem and a painted roof with parchment work. The back parlor has a marbleized slate mantlepiece with an over-mounted mirror in a Renaissance Revival outline. On the back edge of the part is a two-story clapboarded carriagehouse with a Victorian dome. This structure was not depicted in the NRHP designation, however a photograph from 2013 demonstrates the dome has been harmed. 

The house is compositionally noteworthy as a well-planned and well-protected late nineteenth century rural living arrangement, with astounding inside detail and a coordinating carriagehouse. The region in which it is found was arranged in a privileged rural zone, however since the late nineteenth century business and modern structures have entered the territory. The property was added to the National Register of Historic Places in 1983.