Charles Payne House 

The Charles Payne House is a notable site at 25 Brown Street in Pawtucket, Rhode Island. The house was worked in 1855–56 by Charles Payne and later extended with the expansion of two ells and a patio. The - story Gothic-Italianate vernacular house is compositionally critical as a nineteenth century vernacular bungalow in a beautiful setting. In spite of the fact that the round-head picket fence and passage entryways were later evacuated, the property holds an expansive shaded greenery enclosure on with abundant road facing. The Charles Payne House was added to the National Register of Historic Places in 1983. 

The house was developed by Charles Payne, an etcher who established the firm of Payne and Taylor for calico printers in 1849. In 1849, Payne becan to buy packages of land that he would later develop the house on. The primary square of the house was raised in 1855–1856 and later extended with a north wing in the mid-1870s. The last real expansion was an ell on the west side of the house, the date of development happened before 1902. Despite the fact that the house has been the subject of certain adjustments, these progressions are to a great extent subtle. 

The Charles Payne House is a - story Gothic-Italianate vernacular cabin that has a roomy patio nursery established on the site of a since a long time ago evacuated house. The house's peak end faces the road with a back ell and the other ell opposite to the principle hinder on the west side. Focused on the east end of the rooftop is a cross peak which is outwardly counterbalanced by the dormer on the west. The house has a little peak roofed vestibule on the east side, adjusted underneath the cross-peak. The back ell has a joined patio that traverses its length. A solitary story inlet hexagonal straight window projects from the veneer. The distinctive component of the Payne house is the wood trim outside, comprising of hood shape on the matched windows on the south, four sorts of bargeboards and sectioned cornices on the back ell's east side. The inside of the Charles Payne House isn't canvassed in detail by any overview, yet has three mantelpieces on the main floor, two showing Gothic Revival impact in their wooden structures and the third, situated in the back ell, made of dark marble with a round-head opening. In spite of the fact that not referenced in the selection, a photograph demonstrates one of the wooden mantlepieces loaded up with block and rendered unusable at the time. The setting of the house was vital to the National Register selection, which explicitly featured its shaded patio nursery and fencing. At the season of the selection, a decorative round head picket fence encompassed the property and access was through a twofold leaf grid work door. By 2013, the picket fence and passageway door had been expelled, however the property still holds the road facade for its patio nursery. 

As indicated by the National Register of Historic Places, the Charles Payne house is structurally noteworthiness as a "strangely beautiful and well-safeguarded case of the little vernacular bungalows raised amid the center long periods of the nineteenth-century in Pawtucket". The designated property incorporated the Charles Payne house, the encompassing yard, fence and patio nursery, all of which added to the pleasant setting of the selection. It was added to the National Register of Historic Places in 1983.