Tennis the Menace 

"Tennis the Menace" is the twelfth scene of the twelfth period of the American vivified sitcom "The Simpsons". It initially publicized on the Fox organize in the United States on February 11, 2001. In the scene, the Simpsons manufacture a tennis court in their terrace and are disparaged by the whole town as a result of Homer's mediocre tennis capacity. Homer in this way attempts to satisfy Marge by entering the two into a competition, however they rapidly transform into adversaries when Marge replaces Homer with Bart as her accomplice. 

The scene highlights visitor appearances from tennis experts Andre Agassi, Pete Sampras, and sisters Venus and Serena Williams as themselves. "Tennis the Menace" was coordinated by Jen Kamerman and composed by Ian Maxtone-Graham, who likewise coordinated the Williams sisters' execution. The illustrators of "The Simpsons" tried different things with computerized ink and paint on "Tennis the Menace", making it the main scene of the arrangement to be enlivened utilizing the procedure since season 7's "Radioactive Man". 

"Tennis the Menace" has gotten commonly positive surveys from faultfinders with specific acclaim for its visitor stars. Around eight million American homes checked out watch "Tennis the Menace" amid its unique airing, and in 2009 it was discharged on DVD alongside the remainder of the scenes of the twelfth season. 

The Springfield Retirement Castle holds an ability appear, which the Simpson family visits. Grampa wins the show in the wake of playing out his variant of the tune "What's happening, Pussycat?". He wins a free post-mortem examination, so the Simpsons visit a memorial service sales rep to guarantee the prize. While there, Homer chooses to purchase a coffin and a gravestone for Grampa. He additionally finds that a particular sort of gravestone is created from a similar measure of concrete as a tennis court, and this gives him the plan to fabricate a tennis court in the family's lawn. 

The court is well known with Springfield's occupants, however these inhabitants mock Homer and Marge for losing constantly, because of Homer's poor play. Marge begs Homer to pay attention to the diversion, yet he is excessively negligent of how ineffectively he plays tennis. Rather, he attempts to satisfy Marge by entering the pair in Krusty's big name tennis competition, the "Krusty Kharity Klassic". Marge, tired of being giggled at, trench Homer and enters with Bart as her new accomplice. Homer is shocked that he was relinquished for a ten-year-old kid, and endeavors to get retribution by entering the competition with Lisa as his accomplice, notwithstanding Lisa's objection. 

The adjustment in accomplices drives the Simpson family to start contending and forcefully going up against each other. The competition happens, and in the stands, are driving tennis experts Andre Agassi, Pete Sampras, Venus Williams, and Serena Williams. At the competition, Homer trench Lisa for Venus Williams. Accordingly, Marge replaces Bart with Serena Williams as her accomplice. Eventually, Serena and Venus supplant Marge and Homer with Sampras and Agassi, separately. This powers the family to return to the seat and resume their ordinary places in the family. As they appreciate the show of top-class tennis, they concur that it is smarter to watch things than to get things done, and Homer ideas to purchase the family supper with cash he took from Sampras' wallet. 

"Tennis the Menace" was composed by Ian Maxtone-Graham and coordinated by Jen Kamerman as a component of the twelfth period of "The Simpsons" (2000–2001). Maxtone-Graham believes himself to be a terrible tennis player and he has for the longest time been itching to win against his mom in a tennis match. This filled in as the motivation for the scene, as he thought "relational peculiarities around tennis would be a fun show." Maxtone-Graham completed a ton an exploration for the scenes toward the start of the scene where the Simpsons visit a memorial service sales rep at a burial ground. 

He read Jessica Mitford's book "The American Way of Death Revisited", which examines the burial service industry, and had the capacity to take a visit with burial service sales reps at Westwood Village Memorial Park Cemetery in Los Angeles. At the time, he didn't uncover this was for research, and rather claimed to have a withering relative. As indicated by Maxtone-Graham, the visit helped him discover "about urns versus pine boxes, and incineration. I got some information about, 'Well, do the bodies smell?' They were extremely decent and gave me every one of the appropriate responses. It was very entrancing." 

The opening of "Tennis the Menace" is the thing that Maxtone-Graham portrays as a "screw you" starting, as the watcher has "no thought that the contort will be tennis". The piece of the story rotating around tennis does not start until around eight minutes into the scene. "The Simpsons" show sprinter Mike Scully has said that he thought this was "presumably too long to even think about waiting before kicking the story off." 

Maxtone-Graham has likewise said that while he supposes these sort of openings "are somewhat clever", they might be best evaded. In any case, Scully enjoyed the way that the staff incorporated a remark in the scene on its "screw you" starting by having Homer say "I'll wager you didn't see that coming!" to the watchers when he chooses to get the tennis court. The scholars had various exchange endings to "Tennis the Menace" before choosing the one in the long run utilized. For example, at a certain point, the family was to return home to watch the match in which Serena and Sampras went head to head against Venus and Agassi on TV. The staff transformed it to the last one since they didn't need it to feel like the scene dwindled. 

"Tennis the Menace" highlights visitor appearances from Andre Agassi, Pete Sampras, and sisters Venus and Serena Williams. Every one of them showed up as themselves. Official maker Al Jean coordinated Sampras, who Jean thought conveyed his lines "in all respects normally", while Maxtone-Graham coordinated the Williams sisters. Agassi recorded his lines in the late spring of 2000. The Williams sisters, be that as it may, recorded their lines in Los Angeles at some point in the winter of 2000–2001. As indicated by Maxtone-Graham, the sisters were "fantastically decent and unimaginably liberal with their time." 

This is the second episode—after season seven's "Radioactive Man" (1995)—to be enlivened with computerized ink and paint. This sort of computerized shading would not be utilized for all time on the show until the season fourteen scenes "Treehouse of Horror XIII" and "The Great Louse Detective" (2002). It was utilized on "Tennis the Menace" principally to test the system. The explanation behind the long hole between this scene and "The Great Louse Detective" was that the staff of "The Simpsons" needed to refine the look some more before doing it full-time. 

The scene initially disclosed on the Fox organize in the United States on February 11, 2001. It was seen in roughly eight million families that night. With a Nielsen rating of 8.2, the scene tied the "X-Files" scene "Medusa" for the 41st spot in the evaluations for the seven day stretch of February 5–11, 2001. The scene was the fourth-most noteworthy appraised communicate on Fox that week (together with "Medusa"), following scenes of "Allurement Island", "Partner McBeal", and "Boston Public". On August 18, 2009, "Tennis the Menace" was discharged on DVD as a major aspect of the case set "The Simpsons – The Complete Twelfth Season". Staff individuals Mike Scully, Al Jean, Ian Maxtone-Graham, John Frink, Don Payne, Matt Selman, Max Pross, just as TV author and maker Philip Rosenthal, took an interest in the DVD sound critique for the scene. 

Faultfinders have given "Tennis the Menace" for the most part positive audits. Jerry Greene of the "Orlando Sentinel" recorded it at number nine on his 2004 rundown of the show's "Best 10 Sporting Episodes". Nancy Basile of About.com wrote in her 2003 survey that the plot of the scene "enabled us to see more optional characters than expected. It additionally gave Springfield a feeling of network that we now and again don't get in ongoing seasons. In spite of the fact that the explicit utilization of visitor stars has clears composed on top of it, the tennis stars were interesting and ready to ridicule themselves. Homer had some great lines, as well, for example, 'Take your hands off me. They feel like plate of mixed greens tongs.' Overall, an amusing scene." In July 2007, Simon Crerar of "The Times" recorded Agassi's execution as one of the thirty-three most interesting appearances ever of show. 

In his audit of the twelfth period of "The Simpsons", Jason Bailey of DVD Talk composed that the staff individuals' "propensity for utilizing the primary go about as a red herring, just semi-associated with the remainder of the show, is cunning and amusing [...] They'd been doing this sort of thing for a considerable length of time, however despite everything it plays; likewise, they've started to recognize it, and wink about it." 

He noticed the scene from this scene in which Homer tells the watchers that "I'll wager you didn't see that coming!", including that a "minute as is that "The Simpsons" taking care of business: shrewd, knowing, and strangely clever." Also assessing the twelfth season, DVD Movie Guide's Colin Jacobson was more negative, remarking: "I’d love to report that 'Danger' upsets the string of fair scenes [before it in the season], however I can’t. Like its antecedents, it offers a modestly pleasant encounter, yet that’s all the better it can do. Expect a couple of laughs and little else."