Poor Jake's Demise 

Poor Jake's Demise is a 1913 American quiet short droll satire movie coordinated by Allen Curtis and highlighting Max Asher and Lon Chaney. The droll film centers around Jake who discovers his significant other in a bargaining position with another man and later delivers his retribution with a seltzer bottle. It is one of a few droll satire films Chaney made for Universal toward the beginning of his profession and is additionally his previously credited screen job. The film was assumed lost, yet a section of the film was found in England in May 2006 and reestablished. 

Jake gets back home and discovers his better half and Willy Mollycoddle in a trading off position. Chafed, Jake tosses Willy out of the house and reproves his better half and takes steps to execute himself. Frightful that Jake will end it all, the spouse calls the police and three officers are conveyed to discover Jake. Ceasing at a bar before he ends it all, Jake finds Willy who is suffocating his distresses. Jake delivers his retribution on Willy with a seltzer bottle. 

"Poor Jake's Demise" was coordinated by Allen Curtis and delivered by Independent Moving Pictures Company (IMP) and appropriated by Universal Film Manufacturing Company. The screenplay creator was not credited. The film is remarkable for having been the principal charged appearance of Lon Chaney and maybe the presentation of Louise Fazenda. 

The film was discharged on August 16, 1913 and had viewings in Texas, North Carolina, Pennsylvania, Wisconsin, and Illinois. A contemporary audit of the film in "Moving Picture World" portrayed it as "essentially tomfoolery with no unique intrigue, however it is innocuous and needs profanity." 

The film was assumed lost, yet a section of the film was found in England in May 2006. It has since been reestablished by the Haghefilm Laboratory of Amsterdam and Lobster Films, Paris. The reestablished part is 7 minutes and 52 seconds in length. In 2006, the film was appeared at the Pordenone Silent Film Festival. The film would likewise be appeared at the 31st Cinăšfest Sudbury International Film Festival on the night of March 19, 2011. 

In 1957, an article by Jim Neal of the "Denton Record-Chronicle" refered to this as the first of Lon Chaney's movies. Wear G. Smith's book, "Lon Chaney, Jr.: Horror Film Star, 1906-1973", additionally asserts this film as Chaney's first. Rosemary Guiley would likewise allude to this case in "The Encyclopedia of Vampires, Werewolves, and Other Monsters". Sequentially, this is the first discharged film with an affirmed credit for Chaney and furthermore the principal charged discharge. As per Blake, Chaney did not show up in "The Honor of the Family" or "The Ways of Fate", two prior movies now and again credited to him.