Homer to the Max 

"Homer to the Max" is the thirteenth scene of "The Simpsons"<nowiki>'</nowiki> tenth season. It initially publicized on the Fox organize in the United States on February 7, 1999. In the scene, Homer finds that another network show, "Police Cops", has a saint likewise named Homer Simpson. He is pleased with the positive consideration he gets as a result of his name, yet when the TV character is revised from a legend to a blundering moron, he is derided and insulted, so he changes his name to "Max Power" to free himself of the negative consideration. Max increases new companions, and is constrained into a dissent to keep a backwoods from being thumped down. At last, he changes his name back to Homer Simpson. 

The scene was composed by John Swartzwelder and coordinated by Pete Michels. Since airing, it has gotten blended audits from TV commentators. By and large, the scene got a Nielsen rating of 8.5. 

The Simpson family watches the pilot of "Police Cops", a show which pursues a smooth and dashing criminologist named Homer Simpson and his accomplice Lance Kaufman. Homer is enchanted with the positive consideration he gets for sharing the lead character's name, regardless of the family revealing to him it is only a happenstance. 

Following the pilot, in any case, the Homer Simpson character is changed into an imprudent, fat, and lethargic analyst, bringing about Homer being taunted by the general population of Springfield. Mortified, he claims to the makers to change the character back, yet they decline. At that point, after fruitlessly endeavoring to sue the organization for inappropriate utilization of his old name, Homer legitimately changes his name to "Max Power". 

In spite of the fact that the negative consideration blurs away, Marge is miserable that Max changed his name without counseling her. While shopping at Costington's, Max meets a fruitful specialist named Trent Steel. 

Trent welcomes Max and the family to a patio nursery party, in spite of Marge's reservations, where they meet heaps of well known individuals, however Max discovers the gathering is a reason to spare a redwood woods from decimation. In the wake of going with the gathering visitors to the timberland, Max, Marge, and every other person bind themselves to the trees to keep the bulldozers from thumping them down. The Springfield police arrive and Eddie and Lou pursue Max around his tree, endeavoring to "swab" him with mace. As Max adjusts the tree, the chain cuts into it. The redwood falls and thumps down every single other redwood, irritated their recently discovered companions. Max later changes his name back to "Homer Simpson". 

Pete Michels, executive of the scene, had perused a story in the paper about individuals with popular names. He thought of a method for how Homer's life could be influenced on the off chance that he saw somebody on TV with his name. While making the Homer Simpson TV character, the generation staff was choosing if the character ought to be "cool" all through the scene, or on the off chance that he ought to be a bonehead from the earliest starting point. The staff chose to utilize the two techniques and have him turned into a simpleton in the wake of being viewed as cool in the principal scene of the new program. The cap Homer wears while strolling through the shopping center is a farce of one claimed by Woody Allen. Ron Hauge, a "The Simpsons" show maker, proposed the name Max Power to a companion who needed to change his name. His companion, nonetheless, did not take it. The scene would likewise move Tom Martin's cousin to name his child Max Power. One scene from the scene highlights Ned Flanders remarking that kid's shows are effectively ready to change voice performers; to upgrade the joke for his one line of exchange, Flanders is voiced by repeating cast part Karl Wiedergott rather than his customary voice on-screen character Harry Shearer. 

The TV show "Police Cops" is a satire of the TV arrangement "Miami Vice". One of the new TV demonstrates highlights Archie Bunker in the show "All in the Family 1999". Homer proposes the names Hercules Rockefeller, Rembrandt Q. Einstein, and Handsome B. Superb to Judge Snyder for his name change. The "Maximum Power" tune is sung to the tune of "Goldfinger", the subject from the "James Bond" film "Goldfinger" (1964). On-screen character Woody Harrelson, President Bill Clinton and makers Lorne Michaels, Brian Grazer and Jerry Bruckheimer are appeared in participation at the gathering (Grazer's appearance is indistinguishable to his visitor voice appearance as himself from "When You Dish Upon a Star", while Bruckheimer, who has not completed a voice appearance for the show, is the meager man with a facial hair remaining alongside Grazer and wearing a brilliant sportcoat over a plain T-shirt). The police endeavoring to "swab" the protestors is a reference to a few episodes in 1997 in which sheriff's appointees of Humboldt County, California, swabbed pepper shower according to ecological dissenters. Performing artist Jeremy Piven is referenced by Homer in this scene who solicits the makers from Police Cops "Who's Jeremy Piven?" to which they answer "We don't have the foggiest idea". 

"Homer to the Max" completed 39th in the week by week evaluations for the seven day stretch of Feb 1–7, 1999, with a Nielsen rating of 8.5. 

Since airing, this scene has gotten blended surveys from TV commentators. The writers of the book "I Can't Believe It's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide", Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood, composed that however it was "clever in all the correct spots, this is a scene of two unmistakable stories, neither of which work together. The entire Ed Begley, Jr. sparing the woods bit appears to have been attached, as though the stuff about Homer discovering his name being mishandled (shades of Mr. Shimmer once more?) came up short on steam. Not a terrible show, more a kind of 'So what?' appear." Robert Canning of IGN gave the scene a 7.7/10 rating, remarking that "it has various extremely interesting scenes and vital lines", however generally speaking "the storyline didn't generally have anyplace to go and the last 50% of the third demonstration is a finished exercise in futility." Morgan Larrick of About.com noted "Homer to the Max" as "a standout amongst the most life-changing scenes" while investigating the total tenth season. 

In an article composed for the Modern Day Pirates titled "In Search of The Last Classic Simpsons Episode", writer Brandon recorded "Homer to the Max" as a contender for the most recent scene that made him feel like he was "viewing "The Simpsons" in their prime". He trusts it was "the last exemplary scene before [the show's] scenes begin to truly get spotty in quality", and starting there on, "they begin to go months or even seasons between scenes with clean".