Antigua and Barbuda at the 2008 Summer Olympics 

Antigua and Barbuda contended at the 2008 Summer Olympics in Beijing, China, presenting an appointment that included competitors Daniel Bailey, Brendan Christian, James Grayman, and Sonia Williams in olympic style events occasions, and Kareem Valentine in swimming. Antigua and Barbuda's appearance in Beijing denoted its eighth appearance at the Summer Olympics since the country's presentation at the 1976 Summer Olympics in Montrăšal, Canada. There were no medalists from Antigua and Barbuda in 2008, in spite of the fact that Bailey achieved the quarterfinals and Christian the elimination rounds of their individual occasions. 

Antigua and Barbuda took an interest in eight Olympic Games between its presentation at the 1976 Summer Olympics in Montrăšal and its 2008 appearance in Beijing, contending in each release aside from the 1980 Summer Olympics in Moscow. The 2008 Summer Olympic assignment was littler than those of the 1990s, when they were made out of at least thirteen competitors, at the same time, with five members, it was a similar size that it had been at the 2004 Summer Olympics in Athens. As of the finish of the Beijing Games, no Antiguan or Barbudan competitor has won a decoration, despite the fact that Brendan Christian advanced to elimination rounds and Daniel Bailey to quarterfinals of their separate occasions in 2008. At the 2008 diversions Kareem Valentine was the most youthful competitor at fifteen years old and Sonia Williams was the oldest at twenty-nine. 

The Foreign Ministry of Antigua and Barbuda upheld the Chinese treatment of the common agitation in Tibet, an issue defaced in discussion because of self-immolations by Tibetans and various crackdowns on nonconformists, and communicated support for Chinese endeavors to have the Olympics in Beijing in spite of the contention. The banner conveyor for the Games was James Grayman, an Antiguan competitor. 

Antigua Track Club competitor Daniel Everton "Bakka" Bailey contended in the men's 100â m dash in the interest of Antigua and Barbuda and was that year's solitary Antiguan to participate in the occasion. His interest in Beijing denoted his second appearance in the Olympic recreations, following the 2004 Summer Olympics in Athens. In Beijing he was allocated to Heat 1 amid the first round on August 14, going up against Usain Bolt of Jamaica and Vicente Lima of Brazil, among others. Bailey ran the occasion in 10.24â seconds, coming in second spot in a warmth of eight individuals, setting behind warmth pioneer Bolt by 0.04â seconds and in front of Lima by 0.02â seconds. In general, in the first round, Bailey tied Trinidad and Tobago's Richard Thompson for tenth spot out of eighty competitors. 

Bailey progressed to the quarterfinals, which happened soon thereafter. Bailey was set in Heat 5 against, among others, the United States' Walter Dix and Jamaica's Asafa Powell, finishing the second round in 10.23â seconds. He positioned fourth out of eight in the occasion, falling behind Derrick Atkins of the Bahamas (third spot with a period of 10.14â seconds) and in front of Ghana's Aziz Zakari (fifth spot with a period of 10.24â seconds). Generally speaking, Bailey tied Japan's Naoki Tsukahara for twentieth spot out of forty outstanding competitors and did not advance to elimination rounds. 

Previous University of Texas at Austin understudy Brendan Kyle Akeem Christian took an interest for Antigua and Barbuda in the 200â m dash at the Beijing Olympics. Christian, who broke the best American secondary educational time in the 100â m and 200â m dashes, is the child of previous Olympian Donald Christian, a cyclist for Antigua and Barbuda at the 1976 Summer Olympics. Brendan's investment denoted his second Olympic appearance, having contended in the 2004 Summer Olympics. In Beijing he hustled in Heat 8 amid the first round of the occasion on August 17. He positioned second spot out of eight competitors, falling behind warmth pioneer Aaron Armstrong of Trinidad and Tobago by 0.01â seconds and setting in front of Canada's Jared Connaughton by 0.02â seconds. In general, Christian tied Trinidad and Tobago's Rondel Sorrillo and Japan's Shinji Takahira for ninth spot out of sixty-six competitors. 

The following day Christian took part in the quarterfinals and was put in Heat 3 against competitors that included Churandy Martina of the Netherlands Antilles and Kristof Beyens of Belgium. Christian defeated all comers in the race with a period of 20.26â seconds, beating second-place finalist Martina by 0.18â seconds and positioning second generally out of thirty-two competitors. Christian fell behind the general quarterfinal pioneer Brian Dzingai of Zimbabwe by 0.03â seconds and crushed the United States' Walter Dix by 0.01â seconds. Christian progressed to elimination rounds, which occurred around the same time. 

Christian contended in Heat 2 against Usain Bolt of Jamaica, Shawn Crawford of the United States, and Kim Collins of Saint Kitts and Nevis, among others, and positioned fifth out of eight subsequent to running a period of 20.29â seconds. Collins ran 0.04â seconds quicker than Christian, while Mauritius' Stephen Buckland ran 0.11â seconds slower. Christian did not progress to the last round. 

James Grayman contended in the Beijing Olympics as Antigua and Barbuda's sole high jumper, where he partook in the second passing warmth on August 17 against competitors that incorporated Brazil's Jesse Lima and the Czech Republic's Tomăąĺą Jankĺż. Grayman cleared a 2.20â meter tallness on his second endeavor, setting behind tenth-place heat finalist Dmytro Dem'yanyuk of the Ukraine, who made the stature on his first attempt, and eleventh-place heat finalist Linus Thăśrnblad of Sweden, who likewise made the stature on his second endeavor, however had less in general misses than Grayman. He completed in front of the three thirteenth-place heat finalists (Italy's Alessandro Talotti, Spain's Javier Bermejo, and Botswana's Kabelo Kgosiemang) and the sixteenth-place heat finalist (Hup Wei Lee of Malaysia) who accomplished a similar stature, however did as such in three attempts. By and large, Grayman positioned 28th out of 40 contenders and did not progress to finals on August 19. 

Sonia Williams sought Antigua and Barbuda in the ladies' 100â m dash and was the main female individual from the Antiguan national appointment in Beijing. Her cooperation these Games denoted her second Olympic appearance, her initially having been at the 1996 Summer Olympics in Atlanta. In Beijing Williams took an interest in the first round of the occasion on August 15, when she was set in Heat 5 against competitors that included Belgian Kim Gevaert and Belarusian Yuliya Nestsiarenka. She finished the race in 12.04â seconds, completing 6th out of eight competitors. Guam's Cora Alicto, the seventh spot finalist, ran 1.35â seconds slower than Williams, while the fifth spot finalist, Chisato Fukushima of Japan, ran 0.3â seconds quicker. Gevaert, who was the warmth head, earned a period that was 0.71â seconds quicker than Williams'. By and large, Williams positioned 54th out of 85 competitors and did not advance to quarterfinals. 

Fifteen-year-old Kareem "Grinny" Valentine Sandoval was the main individual to contend in a swimming occasion from Antigua and Barbuda in 2008. At the time he was in his third year in secondary school. He contended in the men's 50â m free-form, participating in the August 14 fundamentals. His support in the occasion denoted the fifth time that he had swum in a pool, as he generally rehearsed in the sea. Over the span of his occasion Valentine was set in Heat 2 of 12 against swimmers that included Thepphithak Chindavong of Laos. Valentine swam the occasion in 31.23â seconds, positioning fifth among six contenders. Stany Kempompo Ngangola of the Democratic Republic of the Congo (sixth) completed about four seconds behind him with a period of 35.19â seconds, while Chindavong drove the warmth with a period of 29.31 seconds. By and large, Valentine positioned 96th out of 97 swimmers in the occasion and did not progress to elimination rounds, which were held that equivalent day.