Donna Freedman 

Donna Freedman (additionally Brown) is an anecdotal character from the Australian cleanser musical drama "Neighbors", played by Margot Robbie. The performer reached the throwing executive about a job on the show, and was in the end allowed a gathering, where she discovered that they were throwing for a multi year old young lady. Robbie tried out for the job, however trusting she had performed severely, Robbie went on vacation to Canada. She at that point learned she had won the part and needed to come back to Australia to start taping. She showed up amid the scene communicate on 2 June 2008. Donna was at first presented as a visitor character, however Robbie was elevated to the standard cast not long after she made her introduction. 

Donna was initially depicted as an over the top fanatic of performer Ty Harper (Dean Geyer) and somebody who had a longing for companions and acknowledgment. In the wake of become a close acquaintence with the teenagers of Ramsay Street, Donna changes her ways and develops into a warm, loveable young lady. She has been depicted as being red hot, excellent, nutty and certain. The character's storylines incorporated an association with Ringo Brown (Sam Clark) whom she later wedded, an equivalent sex kiss with Sunny Lee (Hany Lee), the presentation of her family, and an undertaking with Andrew Robinson (Jordan Smith). The character ended up well known with watchers and Robbie earned different honor designations for her depiction of Donna, including two Logie Award selections. In April 2010, it was uncovered that Robbie had advised makers she might want to leave when her agreement terminated toward the year's end. After five months, it was declared that Robbie had stopped "Neighbors" and she withdrew on 26 January 2011. 

At the point when Robbie was 17, she moved to Melbourne and over and over reached the sequential's throwing executive Jan Russ to request a gathering. In the long run Russ consented to see her and when she figured out how old Robbie was, she uncovered that they were throwing for the job of a 17-year-old young lady. Robbie tried out for the job of Donna in 2008. She trusted that she had performed seriously in the tryout and chose to leave for a five-week snowboarding occasion in Canada. Robbie had been in Canada for two days when she got a telephone call revealing to her that she had been effective and that she needed to come back to Australia. Robbie started showing up on-screen in June of that year. Donna was initially expected to have a visitor character job, yet Robbie was elevated to the primary cast not long after her presentation. 

In April 2010, it was uncovered that makers were "doing combating" to keep Robbie with the show after she disclosed to them that she might want to leave when her agreement terminated toward the year's end. Makers started consulting with Robbie to reestablish her agreement and a representative said "Margot isn't going anyplace for quite a while yet. Makers love the character of Donna Freedman and there's bounty available for her in the coming months, especially as far as her on-off sentiment with Ringo." 

Donna's identity has advanced and created all through her time on the show. Donna lands as a fixated groupie of Ty Harper (Dean Geyer), who figures out how to drive her way into the Ramsay Street teenager gathering. Donna had nobody to swing to and covered her adoration in the music scene and Ty, who turned into her concentration for affection and acknowledgment. Donna is driven by a wild requirement for endorsement and acknowledgment, which makes her make a decent attempt. Robbie uncovered that she shares a portion of Donna's attributes. She said "[Donna]'s blazing and active and I'm somewhat similar to that. Now and then I can be excessively boisterous and state things when I shouldn't. In any case, I don't stalk individuals. Other than that, we're somewhat comparative." 

"Television Week" depicted Donna as "wonderful and a free soul who is likewise somewhat uproarious and repulsive", while the "Metro" called her "screwy." The youngsters of Ramsay Street warm to her in the long run and with their assistance, Donna changes her ways and ends up acknowledged. The official "Neighbors" site expresses that Donna has turned into a warm, loveable, enchanting and lively young lady. Her combination into the road and the lives of different inhabitants has developed Donna and she drives the ordinary life she constantly needed. In May 2009, Robbie said that Donna is an "extremely amiable character" and that she gets the opportunity to play out clever and insane storylines while playing her. In November of that year, it was uncovered that Robbie had asked the scriptwriters to release Donna off the rails or go to recovery. Robbie said that she might want a sensational storyline, yet the show's G rating makes it troublesome. Robbie additionally said that she appreciates playing Donna, as she may be "extraordinary" and "somewhat insane". She included "I'm extremely happy I get the chance to play her and not a normal, exhausting high school young lady. You can be a normal, exhausting high school young lady each other day of the week. It's amusing to have the capacity to state and do these things you regularly wouldn't". 

Donna at first lives with and is thought about by her dad, Matt Freedman (Benjamin Mitchell), however after he endeavors to conceal an attempt at manslaughter mishap that Donna submitted, he reveals to her that he should leave or face prison. Donna is harmed and embarrassed when he disregards her. Donna in the end admits to Elle Robinson (Pippa Black) that Matt has left and Donna moves in with Elle, who later turns into her watchman. Toward the finish of 2008, Donna's more youthful sibling and sister, Simon (Mauricio Merino, Jr.) and Tegan (Chelsea Jones) were acquainted with the show. Merino and Jones won three-month contracts with the show through a challenge with "Dolly" magazine. It was reported that the kin would be "Donna's most exceedingly terrible bad dream" and they were portrayed as being "brazen" and "troublesome". Robbie said she was anticipating the entry of Donna's kin and building up her character further with their presentations. She included "The more storylines I do, the more genuine my character progresses toward becoming. Presently, I can get things done and identify with her and comprehend where she's coming from". 

Following the presentation of her kin, Donna's mom was likewise presented in February 2009. Australian performer and artist, Tottie Goldsmith was given the job of Cassandra Freedman. Goldsmith depicted her character as being "manipulative" and "madly narrow minded". Donna and her mom were seen conflicting on numerous events as Cassandra had harmed her little girl a great deal before. Cassandra was a young lady when she had Donna and she didn't have the development to manage a child. Goldsmith said that Cassandra "hated Donna and considered her to be a risk. Throughout the years, Cass has harmed Donna so much that her little girl's nearly turned out to be insusceptible to the manner in which her mom acts". Goldsmith included that Cassandra is definitely not a "maternal individual" and she has not had the capacity to associate with her youngsters. Cassandra moves into the road in an offer to prevail upon well off occupant, Paul Robinson (Stefan Dennis). She is later determined away after she aggravates her association with Donna. 

Just before Cassandra leaves town, she discloses to Donna that Matt, the man who raised her, isn't her natural dad. Cassandra discloses to Donna that her genuine dad is a man named Nick. In 2009, it was reported that Donna's dad had been thrown and would be presented the next year. Brian Vriends was given the job of Nick Nixon. Of the presentation of Brian and Nick, official maker, Susan Bower said "The Freedman family have given incredible show to us up until this point and we have parcels available for Brian, it's extraordinary to have him with us. This is only one of many, numerous incredible storylines we have coming up in 2010". Donna finds that there are two men that could be her dad and she gets in touch with them both. Scratch Nixon answers first and Donna starts to trust that he is her dad. Be that as it may, Professor Nicholas McKay (Chris Bunworth) later turns up and Donna moves toward becoming befuddled over the circumstance. Nicholas has quite recently been discharged from prison and he is quick to accomplish something right. Nonetheless, he harms Donna when he reveals to her that she is much the same as her mom and that she will flee. Robbie said "He adopts a repulsive strategy". Nicholas' landing makes Donna progressively hesitant to discover the aftereffects of the DNA test she requested that Nick take. On the circumstance, Robbie said "She's a miserable sentimental and needs the joyfully ever after – with Ringo, however with her family." The DNA test in the long run demonstrates that Nick is her genuine dad. 

At the point when Robbie initially started taping, she was informed that Donna was androgynous. Of this Robbie stated, "In one of the squares she is conversing with Bridget about their 'first time' and Donna inquires as to whether it was with a person or young lady? I preferred the manner in which the journalists passed on that, it was simply extremely unpretentious and they didn't make a major turning out scene of it. I believe it's a decent message to convey on the grounds that it's not such a major ordeal to bunches of individuals. Not every one of them have such show encompassing it". Donna's first storyline that incorporated this part of her character was a kiss among herself and individual female character, Sunny Lee (Hany Lee). The kiss happens after Donna finds that Sunny has been composing the sentimental love letters given to her by her beau. Radiant is stunned when Donna hangs over and kisses her on the lips, as it is her first kiss. The show's makers called the kiss among Sunny and Donna as "incautious" and Robbie concurred saying "It's truly not a major ordeal by any means. It is anything but a real gay storyline, it's only sort of a rash peck". The storyline came a long time after adversary cleanser "Home and Away" persevered through a reaction to its very own equivalent sex sentiment. 

The storyline got consideration from the Australian Family Association, with representative John Morrissey saying that he was worried about TV "normalizing" same-sex connections. Clinician Dr Janet Hall applauded the storyline, saying it enables families to examine the theme. Grove guarded the kiss, which was shot before the "Home and Away" contention, saying "Our own is a flawless story about kinship. It's exceptionally blameless." She included "In the event that we would complete a lesbian story – and "Neighbors" isn't against lesbian stories – we would do it legitimately. This is an adolescent sentiment story. There's not much". In June 2009, Bower was inquired as to whether there were any designs to investigate Donna's promiscuity, to which she answered that there was most certainly not. She said "We're getting a tremendous measure of influence with Donna being the individual she is and there's simply such a great amount of storyline with her and sentiment with Ringo that I'm not saying it's not feasible, however it's in no arranging stages now". 

Not long after her character's entry on-screen, Robbie said "There is some adoration coming up for Donna. She gets into a long haul relationship and truly succumbs to somebody." Donna first kisses Ringo Brown (Sam Clark) at a kissing corner to get in with the built up youngster gathering. Donna and Ringo later start a relationship, however when Donna needs to take things further, Ringo discloses to her that he needs to back things off. Donna trusts that she is being rejected and when she catches wind of Ringo's association with Carmella Cammeniti (Natalie Blair) and after that sees them together, she stands up to Ringo. Ringo then endeavors to persuade Donna that his heart has a place with her. The couple's relationship experiences different issues. Amid a snapshot of time together at home, Donna leaves Ringo to recover the feline and the house is set land. Donna is compelled to protect Ringo and drag him outside. After Zeke Kinski (Matthew Werkmeister) comes back to Ramsay Street, Ringo trusts that Donna had gone behind his back with his companion and says a final farewell to her. Donna at that point goes to Zeke to look for comfort and it prompts an adoration triangle among them. 

Towards the finish of 2009, Donna and Ringo's relationship experiences a rough fix and amid schoolies week, Donna lays down with Andrew Robinson (Jordan Smith). Andrew later turns up in Erinsborough a lot to Donna's stun. Robbie said that Donna starts to "blow a gasket" since she didn't hope to see Andrew again and now he could tell everybody what occurred between them. Robbie included "Ringo and Donna were certainly experiencing a rough fix for some time, yet things were beginning to turn upward. In the event that she tells the truth, they may figure out how to function through it. However, it doesn't look great." Sam Clark said that Ringo and Donna's adoration for one another is extremely solid, yet he didn't know whether it was sufficiently able to endure a selling out. Robbie and Clark additionally said that the couple were going in various ways profession insightful and it would challenge for them. Donna later starts an undertaking with Andrew after he causes her out and after that puts weight on her to surrender to their fascination. Robbie said that Donna is "complimented" by Andrew's enthusiasm for her and when Ringo puts his vocation before her, Andrew reveals to Donna what she needs to hear. On Andrew and Donna's similarity, Robbie said "Andrew's more into the style scene than Ringo. He's smooth and fashionable, and he's a yearning agent. He's ideal for the world Donna is attempting to get into." However, Robbie conceded that Ringo is the ideal person for Donna as they balance each other out well. Ringo leaves for Sydney in the wake of discovering Donna undermined him and when he restores his association with Donna is "chilly". Robbie remarked on the ex-couple's future and said "I think right now it's very in a critical position. It's right up to the system right now concerning whether they'll get back together or not." 

Ringo and Donna later get back together and to demonstrate that he cherishes her, Ringo proposes. In June 2010, it was uncovered that the 6000th scene festivities would see the wedding of Donna and Ringo. News.com announced that makers trusted that the wedding would "reproduce the enchantment" of Scott Robinson (Jason Donovan) and Charlene Mitchell's (Kylie Minogue) 1987 wedding. Robbie said she had "huge shoes to fill", however she was respected to chip away at her greatest storyline since she arrived. Clark said that Donna and Ringo had settled on the choice that they will be with one another forever and that they are "going to be strong starting now and into the foreseeable future". On the big day, Donna's vehicle stalls and she is compelled to ride in the back of Lucas Fitzgerald's (Scott Major) truck. Donna strolls down the path to Ringo's variant of "All of a sudden", the first melody played at Scott and Charlene's wedding. Clark included "It's an ideal day, yet I can't guarantee they'll live joyfully ever after." Donna and Ringo turned into the 36th couple to get hitched on the show. After a month, Ringo is thumped somewhere around Stephanie Scully's (Carla Bonner) bike and he passes on. Donna is crushed and she remains in her room. Steph comes to visit her and as she is saying 'sorry' Donna gets up and embraces her. Of Donna's response, Robbie said "Donna is nearly in a mess and demands that the entire thing was a mishap. Donna is simply numb and she doesn't have a clue what to feel." 

In September 2010, Robbie affirmed gossipy tidbits that she was to leave "Neighbors" after right around three years. Of her motivation to leave Robbie said "I need to go to America; it's dependably been my objective to work in Hollywood. It's the one phase in my life where I have literally nothing holding me down". Robbie shot her last scenes in October and her character left on-screen in mid 2011. Robbie later uncovered her character's exit is sure and that Donna leaves Ramsay Street for a style configuration school in New York. Robbie said "It is extremely overwhelming for Donna at first. Ringo was the person who connected for Donna to do this course – it resembles he's doing this one final thing for her." She said that Donna ends up resolved to be a triumph and that it is her last opportunity to satisfy Ringo's desires for her. Robbie added that she needed Donna to go to recovery or have an emotional demise, yet she got an "exhausting old upbeat completion." 

Donna goes to Charlie's to see performer Ty Harper, who is her principle center throughout everyday life. Ty acquaints Donna with Rachel Kinski (Caitlin Stasey) and they attempt to get her to leave. Ringo Brown chooses to enable Donna to make companions. Donna clears a territory of the shrub and when a flame breaks out, she is associated with beginning it in light of her odd conduct. Daniel Fitzgerald (Brett Tucker), a school guide, chats with Donna, who at that point chooses to exchange to Erinsborough High. There she in the end progresses toward becoming companions with Rachel and Bridget Parker (Eloise Mignon), and begins dating Ringo. Donna's dad, Matt, bans her from seeing Ringo and she takes his vehicle. Donna unintentionally hits Nicola West (Imogen Bailey) and her canine, Bronte. In any case, Donna is at first ignorant that she hit Nicola and she and Ringo request that Lucas Fitzgerald fix the vehicle. When she understands that she additionally hit Nicola, Donna discloses to Matt what occurred. He attempts to outline Lucas to spare her, however he is gotten and afterward goes on the run. Elle Robinson takes Donna in and turns into her lawful watchman. 

After she quits taking her contraception pills, Donna trusts she might be pregnant. Donna persuades Rachel and Bridget to take pregnancy tests with her. Donna's is negative, yet Bridget finds that she is pregnant. Donna's more youthful kin, Simon and Tegan, touch base in Ramsay Street and their mom, Cassandra, pursues not long after. Ringo and Donna separate and she turns out to be nearer to Rachel's sibling, Zeke. They share a kiss and Donna chooses to leave Erinsborough to deal with her head. On her arrival, she gets back together with Ringo and conflicts with her mom. Before Cassandra leaves town, she discloses to Donna that Matt isn't her natural dad. Donna makes an online video blog in an offer to discover her dad and James Linden (Tim Ross) turns up professing to be Donna's relative. They take a DNA test and James discloses to Donna that it affirms they are connected. James later exchanges Elle's cash out of her online financial balance and leaves, obliterating Donna. Donna meets style fashioner Saffron Jankievicz (Shanyn Asmar) and she is offered a temporary position with her organization. Donna plays hooky and disregards her companions and tasks. She chooses to stop and Saffron slaps her. Donna squeezes charges and Saffron apologizes. Donna becomes a close acquaintence with Kate Ramsay (Ashleigh Brewer) following Rachel's takeoff and Bridget's passing. 

Amid Schoolies week Donna meets Andrew Robinson and engages in sexual relations with him. Andrew turns up in Erinsborough and he and Donna inevitably proceed with their issue. One of their trysts is inadvertently recorded and Scott Griffin (Eamonn George) discovers it and shows at Charlie's. Ringo is crushed and leaves for Sydney. Donna starts college and amid her second address, Saffron turns up as a visitor speaker. Saffron turns Donna's colleagues against her, however Donna faces her. While experiencing her mom's journal, Donna finds that there are two men, Nick Nixon and Nicholas McKay, who could be her natural dad. She reaches them both and she finds a new line of work in Nick Nixon's eatery to perceive what he resembles and she in the end discloses to him that she may be his little girl. They take a DNA test, which affirms that they are connected. Donna attempts to be pleasant to Ringo's new sweetheart, Naomi (Kate Bell), yet she battles. Ringo parts ways with Naomi and Donna finds that Naomi has been following her. Naomi's wastes Donna's college undertaking and takes her own therapeutic record from the emergency clinic. Donna is captured, however Declan Napier (Erin Mullally) and Ringo discover the document at Naomi's home and Donna is discharged. 

Donna is pulverized by some platform after she goes to a structure site to get Ringo. Prior in the day, Paul had altered the framework stage because of a quarrel with the site's proprietor. Ringo encourages Donna to inhale and she is hurried to emergency clinic, where she experiences medical procedure to fix a cracked spleen. Donna and Ringo then rejoin and Ringo proposes to her. Notwithstanding, Donna turns him down, before proposing to him herself. Ringo wins a green card to the United States and they choose to present the wedding. Donna meets Ringo's mom, Prue (Penny Cook) and she later finds Prue and Nick together. The wedding scene must be changed and Donna's vehicle stalls, so Lucas needs to drive Donna and Nick to the new setting. They are halted by the police, yet Donna in the long run makes it to the function and she and Ringo wed. Following the wedding trip, Donna moves in with the Kennedy family. On their one-month commemoration, Ringo is thumped somewhere around Stephanie Scully's (Carla Bonner) motorbike and kicks the bucket. Donna is crushed and she battles to acknowledge that he has gone. Donna at first faults Kate for Ringo's demise since he drove her off the beaten path. Donna is disturbed when she misses Ringo's memorial service. Donna is irate when Paul endeavors to utilize her to irritate Steph at her preliminary. She later tells the court that Steph ought not go to imprison as it won't bring Ringo back. Donna gets a letter from a New York configuration school and Zeke reveals to her that Ringo connected for a spot for her sake. After at first choosing to remain in Ramsay Street, Donna's companions figure out how to persuade her to leave by arranging a style show exhibiting her plans. Donna says her farewells in the road and she leaves for New York with Nick. 

In 2009, "Neighbors" turned into the principal Australian arrangement to build up Twitter represents its characters. Donna was one of four characters to have a record set up, with the others being Declan, Ringo and Zeke. They started sending day by day updates to their fans, giving exhortation and conversing with one another. The updates are "reciprocal to the show's on-air storylines". FremantleMedia Enterprises VP of authorizing Ben Liebmann stated, "We thought it was an extremely extraordinary approach to proceed or enable the gathering of people to draw in with the "Neighbors" world off-screen". The messages are supervised by the Fremantle computerized group, which is incorporated with the story bureau of the "Neighbors" generation group. 

Robbie earned a few honor selections for her depiction of Donna. She was assigned for Most Popular New Female Talent at the 2009 Logie Awards. She was selected for Best Newcomer and Funniest Performance at "Within Soap" Awards and Fave Aussie Hottie at the Nickelodeon Australian Kids' Choice Awards. In 2011, Robbie got a designation for the Logie Award for Most Popular Actress. 

The character has been generally welcomed. The "South Wales Evening Post" called Donna "one of the program's most mainstream faces" and the "Bristol Evening Post" said she was "a standout amongst the most invigorating "Neighbors" characters to go along for some a moon". Daniel Kilkelly of Digital Spy said the character had turned into a most loved with fans. Ruth Deller, of TV site Lowculture, called Donna "savage and awesome". Robbie's co-star, Scott Major (Lucas Fitzgerald) lauded her execution as Donna saying, "Donna could've been played from various perspectives, however I think Margot nailed it, she's constantly enjoyable to work with, she's a truckload of good times and dependably buckles down at her stuff. She's truly made Donna all alone and made Donna her very own character". 

Site AfterEllen remarked on Donna's androgyny saying that first experience with "Neighbors" was "advance". They were additionally upbeat to see that Donna had been added to the credits, implying that she would be around for some time. Sacred Soap named Donna's most vital minutes as "Venturing out with Zeke after Ringo had dumped her" and "Locking lips with Korean trade understudy Sunny". In August 2010, "television Week" included Donna in their "Main 25 "Neighbors" characters". They said "Ditzy, however kind-hearted Donna dependably lands herself stuck in an unfortunate situation".