Virtual Theater 

The Virtual Theater is a PC diversion motor planned by Revolution Software to create experience recreations for PC stages. The motor enabled their group to content occasions, and move vivified sprites against a drawn foundation with moving components utilizing a point-and-snap style interface. Upon its first discharge, it matched contending motors like LucasArts' SCUMM and Sierra's Creative Interpreter, because of its then abnormal state of man-made reasoning. The motor was first proposed in 1989, while the main amusement to utilize it, "Bait of the Temptress", was discharged in 1992, trailed by "Underneath a Steel Sky" (1994), "" (1996) and "" (1997). 

It permitted in-amusement characters to meander around the gameworld autonomously of one another, performing "regular day to day existence" activities, which was not already conceivable, and all characters and articles consumed space; thus, non-player characters needed to evade the player's hero and some other item they seemed to be, well as the player siding step them, accomplishing an increasingly sensible diversion world that past motors were unfit to give, however non-player characters could accidentally hinder a way as the player was crossing the diversion scene. Non-player characters performed a lot less complex assignments with each discharge because of size limitations. 

Two amusements ("Broken Sword: The Shadow of the Templars" and "Broken Sword II: The Smoking Mirror") that utilization a Virtual Theater variation motor would now be able to be played on current equipment utilizing ScummVM, which therefore enables the motor to keep running on stages where the titles were not formally discharged. In 2012, it was affirmed that the motor would be restored as "Virtual Theater 7" for the fifth "Broken Sword" titled "" (2013). 

Charles Cecil and Tony Warriner had cooperated at Artic Computing, an English computer game advancement organization. In 1990 they chose to set up their very own computer game improvement organization, together with David Sykes and Noirin Carmody. For their presentation experience amusement, "Draw of the Temptress", discharged in 1992 for Amiga, Atari ST and PC, Cecil, Warriner, Sykes and Dan Marchant made the idea of the diversion motor titled "Virtual Theater", which Warriner composed. 

For "Underneath a Steel Sky", discharged in 1994 for Amiga, and PC, Revolution utilized a refreshed adaptation of Virtual Theater, Virtual Theater 2.0, composed by Warriner and Sykes. Nonetheless, on the grounds that the amusement was multiple times the span of "Draw of the Temptress", non-player characters needed to perform a lot easier errands than in its antecedent. "Broken Sword: The Shadow of the Templars", discharged in 1996 for PC, Mac and PlayStation, and its continuation, "", discharged in 1997 for PC and PlayStation, additionally utilized adjusted adaptations of the Virtual Theater motor. The motor hence experienced different updates. For "" a pristine motor ("VT7") was created so as to manage numerous stages and, specifically, with screen goals (the framework is based on C++ and OpenGL, and a custom scripting-language to execute the amusement itself). 

Generally in experience amusement motors, non-player characters were static anticipating the player to connect with them to trigger an occasion. Be that as it may, Virtual Theater permitted non-player characters to navigate the world in apparently irregular examples, communicating with their condition. Upon the motor's first discharge, it matched contending motors, for example, LucasArts' SCUMM motor, and Sierra's Creative Interpreter, because of its then abnormal state of computerized reasoning. 

Another favorable position of the motor is that it is a cross-stage motor. It was likewise quicker on the Amiga than the C code that was utilized by numerous USA developers around then. Contrasted with the Sierra titles, the motor moved toward becoming in this regard increasingly modern, a motivation behind why Revolution did the change of "" to the Amiga. 

The majority of the in-amusement objects (counting non-player characters) in Virtual Theater consumed space, which was a special component for a motor at the time. Thusly, non-player characters needed to avoid the player's hero and some other item they seemed to be, well as the player needed to evade them. At the point when a non-player character circumvent the hero, the individual expressed a remark (like "Reason me, Sir"). As the outcome, the motor accomplished a more reasonable diversion world than past motors had the capacity to give, however non-player characters could accidentally obstruct a way as the player was crossing the amusement scene. 

This was helped with the arrival of "Broken Sword: The Shadow of the Templars", where the hero, whenever discovered his path hindered by another character, could just stroll through them. 

Two amusements ("Broken Sword: The Shadow of the Templars" and "Broken Sword II: The Smoking Mirror") that utilization a Virtual Theater variation motor would now be able to be played on present day equipment utilizing ScummVM.