1904 Tour de France 

The 1904 Tour de France was the second Tour de France, held from 2 to 24 July. With a course like its past release, 1903 Tour de France victor Maurice Garin appeared to have rehashed his success just barely over Lucien Pothier, while Hippolyte Aucouturier won four of the six phases. Be that as it may, the race turned into its very own casualty achievement, tormented by embarrassments; cyclists were blamed for having taken trains amid the race. Twelve cyclists, including the initial four of the last arrangement and all stage victors, were precluded by the Union Văšlocipăšdique Frană§aise (UVF). Henri Cornet, initially the fifth-place finisher, was granted the triumph four months after the race. The issues caused the Tour de France to be temporarily dropped, and along these lines the 1905 Tour de France was kept running with various standards from the 1903 and 1904 release. 

The underlying Tour de France of 1903 had been a substantial achievement, and it was immediately chosen to arrange it again in 1904. The course was indistinguishable, with a similar six phases. The tenets were equivalent to in 1903, with one special case: cyclists couldn't enter in only one phase, yet needed to join for the whole race. The top choices for the triumph were Garin, Pothier and Aucouturier, who had performed well in the 1903 Tour de France. Among the contenders was Henri Paret who, at 50 years of age, still holds the record of most seasoned Tour de France cyclist. 

In the 1903 Tour de France, the association ensured that the initial 50 cyclists in the last broad order would procure somewhere around 5 francs for every day. In 1904, if not in excess of 50 cyclists would complete, likewise cyclists who dropped out amid the race would in any case get 5 francs for the days they had been in the race. This standard was added to pull in cyclists who generally would not enter, in light of the fact that the Tour sufficiently required contenders to stay sound. 

In the principal organize, the riders fell after just a couple of kilometers. Lipman broke a finger, and turned into the principal rider to desert this Tour. Around 100â km in the race, Lucien Pothier lost ten minutes to the primary gathering, driven by Maurice Garin, due to a broken bike. In Cosne, at 174â km, Pothier had achieved the main gathering. Aucouturier had lost over one hour by then. Just before the following control post in Nevers, Aucouturier fell all over, and proceeded with the race shrouded in blood. In the last piece of the race, Maurice Garin and Lucien Pothier rode far from the others. They were assaulted by four covered men in a vehicle, yet at the same time completed as the initial two, with Garin beating Pothier by 50â m. The numerous punctured tires and crashes of Aucouturier, apparently the aftereffects of treachery, gave him a period loss of a few hours. 

After the stage, three cyclists were rebuffed: Aucouturier and Samson got fines of 500 and 250 francs, Aucouturier for having a cyclist not in the race tailing him, Samson for riding in the slipstream of a vehicle. Chevallier, who had completed third, was excluded for resting in a vehicle for 45 minutes. 

Amid the stage, Ferdinand Payan had been excluded. A few sources demonstrate he was helped by an engine, other that he was helped by riders not in the race. 

In that first stage, Garin had approached the race official Lefă¨vre for nourishment, which was unlawful. Lefă¨vre, who realized that Garin was the star of the race, disrupted the norms and gave him the nourishment, since he would not like to be in charge of Garin leaving the race on account of appetite. 

The news that Garin had gotten illicit help rapidly spread, and made the over the top group make a move. 

For the second stage, the coordinators had made the alternative to defer the begin by two hours, in the event that the mistral wind was making cycling troublesome. This was redundant, so the riders began at midnight as arranged. 

Amid this stage, Antoine Faurăš lead near the place where he grew up, and 200 fans attempted to stop the remainder of the cyclists from tailing him. Garin hurt his hand amid the occurrence, and Giovanni Gerbi was thumped oblivious, and needed to surrender with broken fingers. The circumstance was just understood after race authorities discharged shots noticeable all around. Further on, nails and broken glass had been spread along the street, which caused numerous punctured tires. In light of this assistance, Faurăš was the first over the Col de la Răšpublique, yet was taken over by the top choices later. Aucouturier won the run. At the point when the riders achieved Marseille, they whined that there had been an excessive number of episodes in this stage, and the stage results ought to be dropped. In the last part, they had been ceased by a substantial gathering of cyclists. Maurice Garin had been assaulted, and his arm had been harmed: he completed the stage directing with just a single hand. There was such a great amount of disarray at the last controle post, that the definite entry times of the cyclists were not recorded. 

In the third stage, the Tour came to Năžmes, close to the main residence of Payan, whose fans were irate on account of his preclusion. They tossed rocks at the riders, and blockaded the street. The cyclists had inconveniences going through Năžmes, and a few were harmed. The most essential occasion for the general grouping was when Căšsar Garin's bike was broken by assailants; he needed to locate another bike, which took him 15 minutes. Further on, nails and broken glass were spread along the street. Numerous riders punctured, however there were no genuine falls. The cyclists passed this part strolling. After Năžmes, a main gathering of five cyclists was shaped: Maurice Garin, Pothier, Aucouturier, Cornet and Beaugendre. Aucouturier and Cornet got away, and Aucouturier won, beating Cornet in the run. 

The fourth stage was kept running without the episodes that tormented the initial three phases. Pothier, Maurice and Căšsar Garin and Beaugendre achieved Bordeaux together, and the stage was chosen by the last kilometer in the velodrome, where Pothier recorded the quickest time. 

In the fifth stage, nails out and about again causing punctures. As mechanical help was not permitted, Cornet needed to ride the keep going 40â km on two punctured tires. Aucouturier won this stage, his third one, however was path behind in the general arrangement, which Garin lead, with just 28 seconds edge to Pothier. 

In the 6th stage, Aucouturier, Garin and Dortignac got away in the last kilometers. Aucouturier marked first at the control post in Ville-d'Avray. Starting there, the race was killed until the velodrome Parc-des-Princes, where the riders would ride the last kilometer. Right now that the riders landed in Paris, it began to rain. The coordinators chose together with the cyclists to reject the last kilometer from the race, and make the control post in Ville-d'Avray the finish of the race. This made Aucouturier the victor of the stage. Maurice Garin completed second, which made him the general champ. 

At first, Maurice Garin was the champ, having guided the race from begin to end. Hippolyte Aucouturier won four phases. Altogether, 27 cyclists wrapped up. 

For every cyclist, the occasions they had required in each stage was included for the general grouping. The cyclist with the least amassed time after the last stage was the victor. 

Amid the race, nine riders were rejected in light of, among different activities, unlawful utilization of vehicles or trains. The Tour coordinators were content with the outcome, yet the Union Văšlocipăšdique Frană§aise (UVF) began an examination after grumblings from different cyclists. Their insightful board of trustees heard declaration from many contenders and witnesses, and, in December 1904, precluded all the stage victors and the initial four finishers (Maurice Garin, Pothier, Căšsar Garin, and Aucouturier). Ten of those precluded were prohibited for one year, Maurice Garin for a long time and the staying two forever. Altogether, 29 riders were rebuffed. 

The explanations behind the exclusion were never made open. 

Fifth-set Henri Cornet, matured 19, at that point turned into the most youthful ever champ of the Tour. Cornet had likewise been cautioned after he had gotten a lift by a vehicle. Just 15 cyclists from the first 27 that completed were not precluded. 

Following the exclusions, the Tour de France came closest in history to being for all time dropped. The race coordinator Henri Desgrange, said he could never run the race again in light of the fact that it had been surpassed by the "visually impaired feelings" of the individuals who assaulted or helped riders as they passed. Desgrange was likewise disturbed that the UVF had forced judgment on his race when he had taught riders as he saw fit. 

A furious trade followed among Desgrange and the UVF however the letters and the definite grumblings that prompted the UVF's activities were lost when the Tour de France chronicles were transported south in 1940 to maintain a strategic distance from the German attack and were gone forever. 

Until an amazing finish, Garin dependably said that he was the legitimate champ of the 1904 Tour de France, however as indicated by Les Woodland, Garin admitted to a companion that he had tricked. 

After the preclusions, the initial four cyclists of the underlying order were precluded. In the new arrangement, just 15 cyclists had wrapped up: 

In light of the outrages related with this Tour, Desgrange needed to stop the race. He anyway altered his opinion, and the standards were changed to keep cyclists from bamboozling: the 1905 Tour de France would be chosen with a framework. Visit de France 1904 champ Cornet would enter the Tour de France for seven additional occasions, yet could never again assume a vital job.