Evil spirits (Star Trek: Enterprise) 

"Evil spirits" is the twentieth scene of the fourth period of the American sci-fi TV arrangement "", and initially disclosed on May 6, 2005 on UPN. The scene was composed by showrunner Manny Coto and coordinated by LeVar Burton. "Evil presences" is the initial segment of a two section story, finishing up with "Land Prime". 

Set in the 22nd century, the arrangement pursues the experiences of the first Starfleet starship "Endeavor", enrollment NX-01. In this scene, the team comes back to Earth to take an interest in a gathering to set up an exchange alliance of outsider races. While there they find a plot including a xenophobic human association called "Land Prime". 

Diminish Weller, who later showed up in "Star Trek Into Darkness" (2013), visitor featured as John Frederick Paxton, and other visitor stars included Harry Groener, who had recently showed up in scenes of both "The Next Generation" and "". Taping of the scene covered with that of a few different scenes, and sets included both the standing sets and a rear way on the Paramount part which was recently utilized in the "" scene "". The basic reaction to the scene was generally positive with one commentator expressing that the two-parter suggested comparable ideological conversation starters to those seen in "". 

"Endeavor" comes back to Earth so as to go to the arrangement of an "Alliance of Planets". Nathan Samuels, a United Earth government serve, gives a discourse, however he neglects to make reference to the commitment they made to get the outsiders to work cooperatively. A lady, later recognized as Susan Khouri, lurches over to T'Pol and produces a vial containing a hair follicle, before falling and kicking the bucket from a phaser wound. Back ready "Endeavor", Doctor Phlox looks at the hair's DNA, taking in it is from the offspring of Commander T'Pol and Commander Tucker, yet T'Pol denies consistently being pregnant. 

Chief Archer meets with Samuels, who is worried that updates on the tyke will mix xenophobic assessment. Lieutenant Reed is requested by Archer to liaise with Harris of Section 31. He is educated that Khouri was an individual from Terra Prime, an enemy of outsider development. In the mean time, in the Terra Prime central station on the Moon, John Frederick Paxton and Doctor Mercer examine the kid. After Mercer leaves, Paxton sends for Daniel Greaves and guides him to manage Mercer. On Earth, Archer reveals to Samuels that he realizes that the priest was a previous individual from Terra Prime and persuades him to give a case record on Khouri. In the interim, Ensign Mayweather gives his correspondent ex, Gannet Brooks, a voyage through the ship. 

On the Moon, Paxton watches film of Colonel Phillip Green ("The Savage Curtain"). Greaves enters and updates Paxton on the status of the kid, and Paxton infuses himself in the neck with an obscure substance. Phlox at that point reports that Khouri's body contained hints of a substance utilized in a zero-gravity mining office. T'Pol and Tucker volunteer for an away mission to the Moon. Camouflaged as excavators, they are immediately confined after Brooks clearly spills subtleties of the mission. Paxton uncovers that the whole mind boggling is a twist skilled ship, and the vessel goes to Mars where it assumes responsibility for the verteron cluster, which regularly shields the Earth from comets. He utilizes the exhibit to shoot a notice shot and issue a final proposal — that all non-people should promptly leave Earth. 

Showrunner and author Manny Coto clarified that the "evil presences" in the scene alludes to the devils of prejudice that mankind must thrashing before they can shape the United Federation of Planets. Colonel Philip Green (the main antagonist of World War III in the "Star Trek" universe) was initially planned to seem before in the season in the scene "" yet the scene was rather re-written to highlight Arik Soong after "The Next Generation" on-screen character Brent Spiner ended up accessible; Green's appearance was one of a few incorporated into season four which connected "Undertaking" to "The Original Series", which incorporated the Mirror Universe and Gorn "In a Mirror, Darkly", Organians in "Eyewitness Effect" and the Orions in "Borderland" and "". 

Diminish Weller was thrown in the job of John Frederick Paxton. Weller had recently showed up in other sci-fi creations, including as the fundamental character in the film "RoboCop" (1987). He likewise played Chuck Taggart in the TV arrangement "Odyssey 5", which had been made by Manny Coto. Weller said of the plot of the scene, "The incredible thing about the entire "Star Trek" inheritance is that they... metaphorize, they allegorize and they portray what's happening the planet today". He would later proceed to pick up a job in the film "Star Trek Into Darkness" (2013). This was the third "Star Trek" appearance of Harry Groener, who played Nathan Samuels. He had recently depicted Tam Elbrum in "The Next Generation" scene "" and the Magistrate in the "" scene "". Eric Pierpoint returned as Harris, whom he had recently played before in the season in the scene "". Diversion show have Tom Bergeron made an appearance in the scene as a Coridan Ambassador. He had recently showed up as D'Marr in the principal season scene "". 

The scene was coordinated by previous "Star Trek: The Next Generation" on-screen character LeVar Burton, his second of the period, and his ninth and last for the arrangement. Recording started on February 4, 2005 and finished on February 14. The primary day of shooting covered with the taping for the past scene, "In a Mirror, Darkly". The primary day was spent taping scenes including Mayweather and Brooks, while the second day covered with a re-shoot of the finish of the scene "" and embeds for "Suffering" and "". The accompanying three days were spent on the standing sets, for example, the scaffold and sickbay, before moving onto the standing cavern sets in front of an audience 9. These had recently been painted white for use in "The Aenar", and were repainted dark to speak to the passages on the Moon for "Evil presences". 

The main outside area utilized was a back road on the Paramount parcel close to the soundstages. The back street had recently been utilized as an area in the "" scene "". Creation moved to the Paramount Theater on the last day of taping, which facilitated the season debuts. It was utilized to depict the Assembly Hall of Starfleet Command. The recording of Colonel Green was shot later, with a greenscreen set on the screen amid the shooting with Weller. 

"Evil spirits" was first broadcast in the United States on UPN on May 6, 2005. It got a 2/4% share among grown-ups between the ages of 18 and 49. This implies it was seen by 2 percent all things considered, and 4 percent of those staring at the TV at the season of the communicate. This was an expansion of the general gathering of people share contrasted with the past scene circulated. 

Michelle Erica Green at TrekNation depicted the scene as an "arresting hour of TV". She suspected that the scene represented similar sorts of ideological inquiries that "The Original Series" did now and again and made her anticipate the accompanying scene. Jamahl Epsicokhan at his site "Jammer's Reviews" gave the scene a score of three out of four, saying that it was a "quite decent story [told] in an outstandingly normal manner". Jay Garmon, while gathering a rundown of the best scenes of "Big business" for TechRepublic, recorded "Evil presences" and "Land Prime" as the third best. He imagined that Peter Weller "stole the show", and that it made a "strong end" to the show in spite of the accompanying scene, "These Are the Voyages..." 

"Evil presences" was discharged on home media in the United States on November 1, 2005, as a major aspect of the period four DVD box set of "Big business". The Blu-beam version was discharged on April 1, 2014.