Bill Mosienko 

William Mosienko (November 2, 1921 – July 9, 1994) was a Ukrainian Canadian expert ice hockey right winger who played 14 seasons in the National Hockey League (NHL) for the Chicago Black Hawks. He is best noted for chronicle the quickest cap trap in NHL history. In a 1952 amusement against the New York Rangers, Mosienko scored three objectives in 21 seconds. 

In the NHL, Mosienko won the Lady Byng Memorial Trophy in 1945 as the most polite player in the association, played in five All-Star Games and was twice named to the second All-Star Team. He left the association in 1955 to help convey proficient hockey to the place where he grew up of Winnipeg. He made the Winnipeg Warriors of the Western Hockey League and was a three-time All-Star in his four years of play in the alliance. He won the association title in 1956. 

Mosienko was accepted into the Hockey Hall of Fame in 1965 and into the Manitoba Sports Hall of Fame and Museum in 1980. 

Mosienko was conceived on November 2, 1921 in Winnipeg, Manitoba. He was one of 14 kids, having nine siblings and four sisters. His dad was a Ukrainian migrant and filled in as a boilermaker with the Canadian Pacific Railway. Mosienko experienced childhood in Winnipeg's north end. 

He built up an enthusiasm for hockey and started playing at 10 years old with the Tobans and later Sherburn athletic clubs. At 17, he looked to experiment with the St. James Canadians junior group in 1939 and in the wake of being told he was excessively youthful, rather joined the Winnipeg Monarchs. 

Chicago Blackhawks player Joe Cooper found Mosienko playing on outside arenas in Winnipeg and suggested that Hawks the executives sign him. Mosienko marked with Chicago at 18 years old and was appointed to their small time group, the Kansas City Americans. In his initial two seasons, he split time between the Americans, the Providence Reds and the Blackhawks. The Blackhawks initially reviewed Mosienko in 1942, supplanting players who had left to battle World War II. He scored his initial two NHL objectives on February 9, 1942, 21 seconds separated. 

Exempted from military administration for medicinal reasons likely identified with his little size, Mosienko was unfit to cross into the United States because of movement confinements and played the 1942–43 season fundamentally with the Quebec Aces of the Quebec Senior Hockey League. He showed up in two recreations when the Hawks went to Toronto. He at last settled himself as a NHL normal in 1943–44 and scored a lifelong high 70. Mosienko and his linemates Clint Smith and Doug Bentley joined to score 219, around then a NHL record. His 70 set a group new kid on the block record that represented 37 years until broken by Denis Savard in 1980–81. 

In 1944–45, Mosienko completed 6th allied scoring with 54 and did not record a solitary punishment minute over the span of the period. He was granted the Lady Byng Memorial Trophy as the NHL's most respectful player and named a Second-Team All-Star. He was likewise casted a ballot the most prominent player in the group by its fans. 

The accompanying season, Chicago mentor Johnny Gottselig combined Mosienko with the Bentley siblings: Max and Doug. The trio shaped what came to be known as the "Horse Line" because of their speed and little size and rose as one of the top scoring trios in the NHL. Max Bentley drove the alliance in scoring in 1945–46, and notwithstanding missing time with knee damage, Mosienko completed 6th. He was again named a Second-Team All-Star. He played in the principal National Hockey League All-Star Game preceding the beginning of the 1947–48 season, amid which he endured a broken leg and was at first dreaded lost for the year. He at last missed the initial two months of play, while the Pony Line was separated for good soon after his damage when Max Bentley was exchanged to the Toronto Maple Leafs. 

Mosienko remained a key supporter of the Blackhawks offense, showing up in five All-Star Games amid his profession. His most acclaimed minute went ahead March 23, 1952, in an amusement against the New York Rangers on the last night of the normal season. He scored three objectives in a 21-second range of the third time frame against New York's Lorne Anderson to set another record for the quickest cap trap by one player. Linemate Gus Bodnar helped on each of the three objectives, and he about had a fourth objective 45 seconds after the fact on a shot that avoided off the goalpost. Mosienko's accomplishment remains a NHL record. 

Because of his little size, Mosienko was a continuous focus of physical maltreatment from bigger adversaries, and endured various wounds subsequently. Notwithstanding this, he abstained from striking back and was very much respected over the group for his honorable direct. In 14 NHL seasons, he totaled just 121 punishment minutes and had only one battle. 

Mosienko left the NHL in 1955 and joined individual player Alf Pike in taking proficient hockey back to Winnipeg. They set up the Winnipeg Warriors of the Western Hockey League. He drove the Warriors to the President's Cup title in the group's first year of 1955–56 and helped the Warriors rout the Quebec Hockey League's Quebec Aces for the Edinburgh Cup, Canada's minor expert title. He scored two objectives in the choosing 6th round of a 3–1 triumph to catch the trophy. He was named to the WHL All-Star Team multiple times: 1957, 1958 and 1959. Despite the fact that he scored 88 in the 1958–59 season, Mosienko reported his retirement after 18 periods of expert hockey. He instructed the group for one season in 1959–60. 

At the season of his retirement from the NHL, Mosienko was seventh unsurpassed allied scoring with 540. He was accepted into the Hockey Hall of Fame in 1965, and to the Manitoba Sports Hall of Fame and Museum in 1980. Furthermore, Mosienko is regarded by the Manitoba Hockey Hall of Fame and in 2000 was named to its commonplace All-Century First All-Star Team. 

Following his retirement, Mosienko and Joe Cooper worked a string of bowling alleys in Winnipeg, one of which keeps on being worked by his family. He was a supporter of Winnipeg minor hockey and Manitoba oldtimers affiliations. There is a field named in Mosienko's respect in the place where he grew up of Winnipeg. 

Mosienko passed on of disease in Winnipeg in 1994 at 72 years old. He had a spouse, Wanda, two children and one little girl. His grandson, Tyler, is likewise an expert hockey player. The more youthful Mosienko recollects his granddad as a modest man who might go along with him on the family's terrace arena when he was figuring out how to skate as a youngster.