Quiet Hill 2 

Quiet Hill 2 is a survival loathsomeness computer game distributed by Konami for the PlayStation 2 and created by Team Silent, some portion of Konami Computer Entertainment Tokyo. It was discharged in September 2001 as the second portion in the "Quiet Hill" arrangement. An all-encompassing rendition containing an additional reward situation and different options was distributed for Xbox in December of that year. In 2002 it was ported to Windows. A remastered top notch variant was discharged for the PlayStation 3 and the Xbox 360 out of 2012 as a major aspect of the "Quiet Hill HD Collection". 

While set in the arrangement's eponymous anecdotal American town, "Quiet Hill 2" is certifiably not an immediate continuation of the primary "Quiet Hill" diversion. Rather, it focuses on James Sunderland, who enters the town in the wake of getting a letter obviously composed by his perished spouse, saying she is hanging tight for him in Silent Hill. Joined by Maria, who firmly takes after her, he scans for her and finds reality about her demise. Extra material in rereleases and ports included "Conceived from a Wish", which centers around Maria before she and James meet. 

"Quiet Hill 2" utilizes a third-individual view and places a more prominent accentuation on discovering things and fathoming enigmas than battle. It incorporates mental viewpoints, for example, the progressive vanishing of Mary's letter, and references to history, movies and writing. More humanoid than their partners in the first amusement, a portion of the beasts were intended to mirror James' intuitive. 

"Quiet Hill 2" got basic approval. Inside the long stretch of its discharge in North America, Japan, and Europe, more than one million duplicates were sold, with the best number of offers in North America. English-language commentators applauded the air, illustrations, story and beast plans of "Quiet Hill 2", yet scrutinized the controls as hard to utilize albeit much improved over its forerunner. Usually considered the best awfulness diversion and among the best computer games ever, applauded for its story and utilization of similitudes, mental ghastliness and unthinkable subjects, soundtrack and sound structure. The amusement was trailed by "Quiet Hill 3" in 2003. 

The object of "Quiet Hill 2" is to direct player character, James Sunderland, through the beast filled town of Silent Hill as he scans for his perished spouse. The diversion includes a third-individual view, with different camera points. The default control for "Quiet Hill 2" has James moving toward the path that he is confronting when the player tilts the simple stick upwards. "Quiet Hill 2" does not go through a heads show; to check James' wellbeing, area, and things, the player must enter the delay amusement menu to audit his status. All through the amusement, James gathers maps, which must be perused if there is adequate light or when his electric lamp is on. He additionally refreshes important maps to reflect bolted entryways, pieces of information, and hindrances, and records the substance of all archives for future reference. 

A great part of the ongoing interaction comprises of exploring the town and finding keys or different things to sidestep entryways or different obstacles, with less spotlight on murdering adversaries. Sporadically riddles will be exhibited, regularly with questions left for the player to translate. The trouble dimensions of the adversaries and the riddles are resolved autonomously by the player before beginning the diversion. James keeps a radio with him, which alarms him to the nearness of animals by radiating static, enabling him to identify them even through the thick haze. He additionally tilts his head toward a close-by thing or beast. For battle, he discovers three scuffle weapons and three guns through the span of the amusement, with another two skirmish weapons opened amid replays. "Wellbeing" restoratives and ammo can be found all through the diversion. 

While not an immediate continuation of the occasions and characters of the principal "Quiet Hill" amusement, "Quiet Hill 2" happens in the arrangement's namesake town, situated in the northeastern United States. "Quiet Hill 2" is set in another zone of the town, and investigates some of Silent Hill's backstory. The town draws upon the mind of its guests and at last structures elective variants of the town, which contrast contingent upon the character. The idea driving the town was "a little, country town in America"; to make the setting progressively practical, a few structures and rooms need decorations. 

James Sunderland (Guy Cihi) comes to Silent Hill after evidently getting a letter from his better half Mary (Monica Taylor Horgan), who passed on of a sickness three years prior. While investigating the town, he experiences Angela Orosco (Donna Burke), a young runaway hunting down her mom; Eddie Dombrowski (David Schaufele), another adolescent runaway; and Laura (Jacquelyn Brekenridge), an eight-year-old who become a close acquaintence with Mary and blames James for not genuinely cherishing her. James looks through a nearby park, where he meets Maria (Horgan), who unequivocally takes after Mary yet has a substantially more forceful identity. Maria asserts that she has never met or seen Mary, and in light of the fact that she is unnerved by the beasts, James enables her to tail him. 

Following Laura to a clinic and hunting down her there at Maria's request, James and Maria are trapped by the beast Pyramid Head, and Maria is executed while James get away. James takes steps to look through the lodging that he and Mary remained at amid their excursion. In transit, James discovers Maria alive and safe in a bolted room. She guarantees obliviousness of their past experience and talks about components of James' and Mary's past that just Mary would know. James embarks to figure out how to free Maria however comes back to locate her dead once more. Later on, he saves Angela from a beast; she admits that her dad explicitly manhandled her, and a news section suggests she executed him in self-protection before coming to Silent Hill. He additionally goes up against Eddie, who confesses to harming a domineering jerk, and executing a pooch, before escaping to Silent Hill. At the point when Eddie assaults him, James slaughters him in self-preservation. 

At the inn, James finds a tape which portrays him euthanizing his withering spouse, and Mary's letter turns into a clear bit of paper. In another room, a last gathering with Angela sees her abandoning life, unfit to adapt to her injury. She strolls into a flame and isn't seen once more. A while later, James experiences two Pyramid Heads, alongside Maria, who is slaughtered once more. James understands that Pyramid Head was made in light of the fact that he required somebody to rebuff him, and every one of the beasts are signs of his mind. The envelope from Mary vanishes and both Pyramid Heads end it all. James heads to the lodging's housetop; contingent upon decisions made by the player all through the amusement, he experiences either Mary or Maria camouflaged as her. 

"Quiet Hill 2" highlights six endings; Konami has kept their canonicity uncertain. In "Leave", James has one final gathering with Mary, peruses her letter, and leaves the town with Laura. "In Water" sees James end it all by driving his vehicle off a bluff. The "Maria" finishing considers Mary to be the lady on the housetop, who has not pardoned James for murdering her; after her thrashing, James expels her as a mental trip and afterward leaves the town with an alive Maria, who quickly hacks, proposing she will wind up wiped out similarly as Mary did, and the cycle will rehash. The other three endings are just accessible in replay amusements, including "Resurrection", in which James intends to revive Mary utilizing arcane items gathered all through the diversion, and two joke endings: "Pooch", where James finds that a puppy has been controlling every one of the occasions of the diversion, and "UFO", where James is kidnapped by extraterrestrials with the assistance of the primary amusement's hero, Harry Mason. 

"Conceived from a Wish" is a side-story situation in the extraordinary versions and re-arrivals of the amusement in which the player assumes responsibility for Maria in no time before she and James meet at Silent Hill. In the wake of awakening in the town with a weapon and examining suicide, she sets out to discover somebody. She in the long run experiences a nearby manor, where she hears the voice of its proprietor, Ernest Baldwin. Ernest won't let Maria into the room he is in and will just converse with her through its shut entryway. After Maria finishes undertakings for him, Ernest cautions her about James, whom he portrays as a "terrible man". After Maria opens the way to Ernest's room and thinks that its vacant, she leaves the manor. At the finish of the situation, Maria ponders suicide afresh, in any case sets out to discover James. 

Advancement of "Quiet Hill 2" started in June 1999, straightforwardly after the culmination of its forerunner. The amusement was made by Team Silent, a generation bunch inside Konami Computer Entertainment Tokyo. The story was brought about by CGI chief Takayoshi Sato, who put together it with respect to Russian creator Fyodor Dostoyevsky's tale "Wrongdoing and Punishment" (1866), with individual individuals from the group teaming up on the real situation. The fundamental composing was finished by Hiroyuki Owaku and Sato who gave the exchange to the female characters. "Quiet Hill 2"s spending plan has been assessed at US$7–10 million by Sato, an expansion from the past portion's evaluated expense of US$3–5 million. The choice to deliver a spin-off of "Quiet Hill" was incompletely a money related one, as it had been monetarily fruitful, and somewhat an inventive one, as the group had confronted troubles while chipping away at the first amusement. The group was given a little window to settle on a stage. As it was unfit to accumulate data on the then-unannounced GameCube and Xbox supports, they started creation of the diversion for the PlayStation 2. Maker Akihiro Imamura expressed that the choice was likewise affected by "a desire from the business segment that we move quickly on the PS2. You know, it is as of now the market center". Imamura read all remarks about the first amusement and remembered them while chipping away at "Quiet Hill 2". He evaluated that a sum of fifty individuals chipped away at the amusement: while the imaginative group from the primary diversion remained, they needed to acquire thirty individuals from Konami Computer Entertainment Tokyo. Created in the meantime, the PlayStation 2 rendition of "Quiet Hill 2" and its Xbox port appeared at the March 2001 Tokyo Game Show to positive responses. 

"Quiet Hill 2" had a similar environment of mental ghastliness as the principal "Quiet Hill" diversion. As the engineers previously had a harsh feeling of the diversion's condition, they centered around its plot first, as opposed to the procedure utilized with the main amusement. The PlayStation 2 equipment enabled the designers to make improved mist and shadow embellishments. For instance, as a beast approaches the player character, its shadow cast on the divider by the electric lamp develops. When managing the amusement's camera points, the group battled with a harmony between those that remained consistent with the imaginative vision and those that did not hamper interactivity. Mental components, for example, the steady vanishing of Mary's letter and representative openings, were fused into the amusement. The group needed "Quiet Hill 2"s hero to "reflect [the] insidious," against which the hero of the principal amusement fights. 

For the amusement's aesthetic style, the group drew on an assortment of impacts: crafted by movie executives David Cronenberg, David Fincher, David Lynch and Alfred Hitchcock, alongside movies like the 1990 spine chiller/blood and guts movie "Jacob's Ladder", and painters, for example, Francis Bacon, Rembrandt and Andrew Wyeth. Right off the bat in the undertaking, they examined the 1996 computer game "Tomb Raider"s formation of 3D conditions. Different impacts on the amusement incorporated the 1992 survival awfulness computer game "Alone in the Dark", the main "Quiet Hill" diversion, and the Japanese comic "Whirr" by Morohashi. While taking a shot at the character structures, Sato and his group outlined human appearances and different articulations. To pick up a superior feeling of the characters' facial structures, they drew the characters' profiles from different edges, before making wire-outline models, each comprising of six thousand polygons; they at that point finished the model with surfaces. Information for the character movement was taken through movement catch, and utilizing Softimage, they vivified the characters. Masahiro Ito structured the beasts in "Quiet Hill 2"; "soured tissue" was the idea driving their appearance. The beasts were likewise to consolidate "a component of mankind". Generally, the beasts mirror the hero's subliminal. For instance, the beast Pyramid Head depended on the killers of the town's anecdotal history and is proposed to be a punisher for James. Two special cases to this subject are the "Theoretical Daddy", an impression of Angela's subliminal and recollections, and the "Creepers", which are additionally found in the main amusement. 

"Quiet Hill 2" likewise fuses a few references to genuine occasions. In the first situation, the engineers planned Maria and James with double identities: Maria's other identity was "Mary", a reference to Mary Jane Kelly, Jack the Ripper's last unfortunate casualty, while James' was "Joseph", a reference to one of the Jack the Ripper suspects. Eddie Dombrowski's name was taken from performing artist Eddie Murphy amid the starting periods of creation when Eddie was initially structured with a wonderfully hopeful identity. The name of Angela Orosco was gotten from Angela Bennett, the name of the hero in the 1995 film "The Net", and Laura's from the 1970 novel "No Language But a Cry" by Richard D'Ambrosio. The engineers ridiculed weapons in American culture by enabling James to discover a handgun in a shopping basket. There are likewise signs that the format of Silent Hill was put together to a limited degree with respect to the town of San Bruno, California. 

Akira Yamaoka created the music for "Quiet Hill 2". At his home, Yamaoka took three days to compose the music for "Subject of Laura", "Quiet Hill 2"s principle topic, by joining "a miserable song" and "a solid beat", despite the fact that he doesn't believe the tune to be the "most critical" component of a melodic piece. He needed the music to bring out feelings in the player. "Quiet Hill 2" utilizes audio cues going from shouts to strides on broken glass. Responsible for the diversion's fifty audio cues, Yamaoka needed to astonish the player with various sounds and make a disrupting situation. He likewise consolidated infrequent quiet, remarking that "choosing snapshots of quietness is another method for delivering sound". 

Konami distributed "Quiet Hill 2 Original Soundtrack" in Japan on October 3, 2001. Eight tracks ("Theme of Laura", "Invalid Moon", "Love Psalm", "Genuine", "Guarantee", "Fermata in Mistic Air", "Laura Plays the Piano" and "Overdose Delusion") showed up in the 2006 PlayStation Portable discharge "The Silent Hill Experience". At the 2006 Play! A Video Game Symphony show in Chicago, Illinois, Yamaoka performed music from the arrangement, including "Subject of Laura", with a full-estimate ensemble. 

"Quiet Hill 2" was first discharged for the PlayStation 2 in North America on September 24, 2001, in Japan on September 27, 2001, and in Europe on November 23, 2001. The first European version likewise incorporated a second circle: a "Creation of" DVD video including trailers, a work of art exhibition and a narrative on the amusement's improvement. 

An all-encompassing rendition of the diversion was distributed for Xbox in North America on December 20, 2001, Japan on February 22, 2002, and Europe on October 14, 2002. Every district had an alternate captions for the amusement: in Japan, "Anxious Dreams" in North America, and "Inward Fears" in Europe. This version contained the short reward situation, "Conceived from a Wish" and other minor improvements. This reexamined adaptation was ported back to the PlayStation 2 and subtitled "Executive's Cut" in Europe, yet was not subtitled in North America, and was just discharged under the "Best Hits" standard. Animal Labs ported this version to Windows, which Konami discharged in December 2002. Included highlights in the PC variant incorporate the capacity to quicksave and watch trailers for "Quiet Hill 3". 

In 2006, Konami re-discharged the all-inclusive variant of "Quiet Hill 2" with its aberrant PS2 continuations, "Quiet Hill 3" and "", in a pack entitled "The Silent Hill Collection" in Europe and Japan. "Quiet Hill HD Collection", an aggregation of remastered top quality versions of "Quiet Hill 2" and "3", was discharged for the PlayStation 3 and the Xbox 360 on March 20, 2012. It contains new voice performing artists for the characters of the two amusements, alongside the choice in "Quiet Hill 2" to tune in to the first ones. It had numerous bugs and specialized issues upon dispatch; these were scarcely resolved after the arrival of online patches. 

"Quiet Hill 2" got basic approval, selling more than one million duplicates in the period of its discharge in North America, Japan and Europe, with the most units sold in North America. Rating accumulation site Metacritic demonstrates a normal rating of 89 out of 100 for the PS2 variant, 84 out of 100 for the Xbox adaptation, and 70 out of 100 for the PC form. 

"Quiet Hill 2" got acclaim from computer game writers at the season of its discharge and all things considered. Andy Greenwald of "Turn" magazine commended it as a terrifying however "limited" amusement. Jon Thompson of AllGame expressed: ""Silent Hill 2" feels somewhat hurried, and in spite of the fact that it probably won't satisfy the confounding frightfulness of the principal amusement, it packs enough of its own punch to make it a commendable spin-off." IGN's Doug Perry stated: "It's unnerving, profound, astute, and endeavors to improve the class, if only a bit, and at last, that is all I truly need in a survival loathsomeness diversion." Joe Fielder of GameSpot finished up, ""Silent Hill 2" is an a lot prettier, to some degree more intelligent however less a convincing amusement than the first." In "" (2010), Tristian Donovan depicted "Quiet Hill 2" as the "high point" of the arrangement. In a review article on the survival repulsiveness classification, IGN author Jim Sterling lauded the amusement's plot as "one of the best instances of account development in gaming right up 'til the present time". In another review article on survival loathsomeness, individual IGN essayist Travis Fahs acknowledged the amusement as a factor in the "fleeting time of reestablished enthusiasm for repulsiveness diversions". Internet amusement commentator for "The Escapist Magazine" Ben "Yahtzee" Croshaw records this diversion as among his main five most loved rounds ever, commending it for its thick and disrupting climate making pressure and dread for players. In his audit of the diversion he remarked, "Quiet Hill 2 is the amusement I replay from time to time to advise myself that for all the sparkling darker, brisk time occasion, RPG component space marines, gaming is as yet worth safeguarding," and that "It's a captivating voyage of torment and sadness that abandons you candidly depleted and fulfilled." 

The designs and environment of "Quiet Hill 2" were applauded by analysts, who featured the smooth changes from PC created (CG) to in-amusement cutscenes and the feeling of claustrophobia brought about by the mist. Then again, Thompson felt that the grainy picture impacts and thick haze shrouded the subtleties of the earth, while Fielder composed that the outside conditions "once in a while push the PlayStation 2's graphical capacities". Character liveliness was viewed as practical by commentators, however James' movement in the CG some of the time showed up "puppet"- like, as per Perry. The voice acting earned blended reactions from analysts isolated about whether it was very much finished with an improved content, or hampered by the content. Analysts delighted in the beast plans, albeit some found the beasts less alarming because of the bounty of ammo, and being effectively maintained a strategic distance from. Commentators found the camera, however improved, still troublesome while doing combating beasts which dangled from the ceiling—concerns resounded by analysts of the PC rendition. The soundtrack and audio cues were considered by commentators to be powerful in making anticipation, however Thompson thought of them as here and there "somewhat constrained and imagined". The riddles were by and large observed as not excessively testing by commentators, however Thompson discovered them for the most part simple and GameSpy's David Hodgeson composed that they were some of the time nonsensical. Less generally welcomed was the battle, reprimanded for its absence of test and effectively crushed beasts and managers. 

Responses to the Xbox port were additionally positive. Analysts have composed that the PlayStation 2 and Xbox renditions were generally comparable, with the exception of the "Conceived from a Wish" side-situation found in the Xbox variant. "Eurogamer"s Kristan Reed called "Conceived from a Wish" "more like a demo than anything", while Fielder depicted it as "a praiseworthy additional". Both felt that it could be finished in around an hour and did not add a lot to the diversion. The PC port, interestingly, got blended response. Allen Rausch of GameSpy considered the PC port by and large to be "[a] incredible interpretation of Konami's trendy and startling survival-loathsomeness diversion". IGN's Ivan Sulic exhorted against playing the diversion with the console, and appraised the amusement "incredible". On the other hand, Ron Dulin, another commentator for GameSpot, expressed: "Not in any case the amusement's foggy climate is thick enough to cover up "Quiet Hill 2"s issues." 

Today, "Quiet Hill 2" is considered by numerous individuals to be the best loathsomeness round ever in light of its story and utilization of representations, mental repulsiveness, and unthinkable themes. It positioned first on X-Play's rundown of the scariest rounds ever in 2006. In 2009, IGN recorded it as one of the five best ghastliness computer games made after 2000, and one of the twelve biggest PlayStation 2 rounds ever. Also, in 2010, IGN positioned it as 54th in its main 100 PS2 recreations. In a review by "GamePro", it was the 26th best amusement for the PS2. In 2008, GamesRadar set it on its rundown of the 15 best "videogame stories" regularly, portraying it as "a rebuffing story not effectively coordinated". In 2009, "Wired News" recorded it as the eleventh most powerful round of the decade for its accentuation on mental repulsiveness and investigation of forbidden themes, for example, inbreeding and local maltreatment, as opposed to gut. In 2012, a top computer games ever list by G4 telecom company positioned the diversion in 85th spot. That equivalent year, the amusement's account was positioned first on GamesRadar's rundown of The Best Videogame Stories Ever. All the more as of late, "Quiet Hill 2" was recorded as the number two top ghastliness round ever in the October 2014 issue of "Amusement Informer", and number eight on GameTrailers' Top Ten Twos rundown of the greatest second establishment recreations in 2015.