Randolph, Tennessee 

Randolph is a rustic unincorporated network in Tipton County, Tennessee, United States, situated on the banks of the Mississippi River. Randolph was established during the 1820s and in 1827, the Randolph post office was set up. During the 1830s, the town turned into an early focus of waterway business in West Tennessee. Randolph sent more cotton every year than Memphis until 1840. In 1834, the primary minister of the Methodist gathering was delegated. The fortunes of the network started to decrease in the late 1840s due to fizzled railroad advancement, an ominous mail course and different components. The primary Confederate States Army fortress in Tennessee was worked at Randolph from the get-go in the Civil War in 1861, a second stronghold at Randolph was built later that equivalent year. Amid the Civil War, the town was torched twice by Union Army powers. 

The settlement is situated on the second Chickasaw Bluff, the scene is commanded by valleys cut into the dirt as a result of disintegration. The surface soil is made for the most part out of residue topsoil, got from dissolved loess, and is found in various characteristics and at various phases of disintegration. The stratum underneath the surface comprises of icy rock. Randolph is arranged on the southeastern edge of the New Madrid Seismic Zone, a region with a high tremor chance. Somewhere in the range of 1974 and 2004, forty-five quakes were recorded in a span of around the settlement. Situated in the muggy subtropical atmosphere zone, the atmosphere is portrayed by sweltering, damp summers and nippy to mellow winters. 

In 2008, "Randolph Bluff Historic Park" was devoted. The recreation center is proposed to advance the Civil War history of the network and make the novel perspectives on the Mississippi River accessible to a more extensive open. Starting at 2008, Randolph has a populace of around 200 and comprises of around two dozen homes. The economy of the provincial network is commanded by horticulture with no real ventures and organizations present. The Girl Scouts Heart of the South works a camp at Randolph. 

Around 1800, Europeans started settling the land east of the Mississippi River that was occupied by the Chickasaw Indians for a considerable length of time before the entry of Europeans. Chickasaw land in West Tennessee and southwestern Kentucky was surrendered in the Jackson Purchase. In 1818, the two sides consented to the exchange by marking the Treaty of Tuscaloosa. 

In the mid nineteenth century, the landscape of the Chickasaw Bluffs gave promising areas to a harbor on the Mississippi River for Randolph. In 1820, the region had an expected populace of 54. Right off the bat during the 1820s, speculators John T. Dark colored and Robert Bedford were the proprietors of the land that would shape Randolph a couple of years after the fact. Just north of Memphis by water, they depicted the region as "a great arrival for Mississippi River flatboats". The Hatchie River, joining the Mississippi River only north of Randolph, was open to steamboats upriver to Bolivar. Darker and Bedford picked the site to spread out the arrangement for Randolph, a promising waterway town. The "Tennessee Encyclopedia of History and Culture" gives the date of Randolph's legitimate foundation as 1823. Different reports date the establishment to 1827 or 1828. The settlement is named for John Randolph (1773–1833), a pioneer in the United States Congress from Virginia. 

Situated on the banks of the Mississippi River, the geology of Randolph accommodated a perfect harbor for steamboats and flatboats at all stream stages. Randolph turned into the focal point of steamboat trade in Tennessee. The town was an early adversary of Memphis over business predominance on the Mississippi River. 

In 1830, Randolph was the most vital transportation point in Tennessee. In the mid-1830s, Randolph dispatched up to 40,000 parcels of cotton on the Mississippi River consistently. More cotton was delivered from Randolph than from Memphis until 1840. At the pinnacle of its business achievement, the network was known as the "extraordinary steamboat station of West Tennessee". 

By 1829, Randolph had three commission distribution centers, six dry products stores, ten doctors and one bar. In 1834, Randolph had a populace of around 1,000. At that point, the town had four inns, very nearly fifty organizations, tuition based schools, and in excess of ten cantinas. During the 1830s, two papers were distributed in Randolph, the "Randolph Recorder" and the "Randolph Whig". During the 1830s, the primary bank was established and a stagecoach line gave an association among Randolph and Jackson two times per week. The business achievement of Randolph can be credited to some degree to the utilization of slave work, for the most part for the development of cotton. Corn, beans and peas were likewise developed. In the "Randolph Recorder" amid the mid 1830s, landowners declared open closeouts of slaves or offered rewards for rampant or stolen slaves. 

The fortunes of Randolph declined in the later 1840s and the 1850s because of numerous elements, beginning not long after the foundation of the town. Five years after the settlement was established, a disagreement about the responsibility for land the town was set up on, emerged over a defective land title with land proprietor Ann Grambelling from New York. Until 1835, the pending claim "anticipated the development of populace" in and around Randolph. The occupants of the network repurchased the land their town was established on for $8,000 in a settlement. 

A negative mail line likewise had an early and enduring impact on the fortunes of the town. At the point when the mail course was built up in 1829, Randolph was put toward the finish of a branch course of the mail line and got mail just once every week. Fizzled railroad improvement further added to the death of the town; and in 1852, occupants of Randolph fruitlessly attempted to move the district situate from Covington to Randolph. Monetary misery and David Crockett's fizzled endeavor to cut a trench from the Hatchie River to the Tennessee River likewise were issues that negatively affected the eventual fate of business success in Randolph. Amid the Civil War, the town was copied down twice, in September 1862 and again in 1865, disheartening numerous occupants from re-building homes and organizations a second time. 

Stronghold Wright was the main Confederate Army fortress worked at Randolph. On January 20, 1861, the Memphis "Request" distributed a genius secessionist proposition to manufacture a fortification at Randolph to protect Memphis. In April 1861, Tennessee Governor Isham G. Harris requested to set up a camp and complete the fortress at Randolph. Around 5,000 troops from Tennessee, Arkansas and the Confederate Army were positioned at the area to achieve the undertaking. By June 1861, fifty guns were accounted for to be prepared at Fort Wright. 

Nathan Bedford Forrest (1821–77) prepared at Fort Wright. Forrest and other future pioneers in the Confederate States Army and the Army of Tennessee got preparing at Fort Wright. The fortress was Tennessee's first military preparing camp in which warriors could pick up involvement in the development of strongholds and the setup of mounted guns batteries. Fortress Wright was the forwardmost protective position on the Mississippi River until July 1861. In 2008, just a powder magazine is left of Fort Wright. 

Fortress Randolph, the second Confederate fortification in the territory amid the Civil War, was developed in Fall 1861. The fortress was arranged on the Mississippi River feigns, about southwest of Fort Wright. In a dispatch distributed by the New York Times in March 1862, Fort Randolph is portrayed as a "harsh and inadequate earthwork (...), in excess of 100 feet over the stream". The situation of the stronghold permitted a perspective on the Mississippi River for , both upstream and downstream. In 2008, Fort Randolph is no longer in presence. 

In 1862, Union Army Major General William T. Sherman (1820–91) and his troops expected control of Memphis and the encompassing zones. While endeavoring to hold the region under Union control, Sherman moved toward becoming "disappointed by the steady guerrilla action in his segment". Confederate guerrillas from the Randolph region debilitated the Union powers along the Mississippi River. 

In September 1862, the Union supply dispatch "Eugene" was terminated at from Randolph. Sherman requested to "crush the spot, going out to check the spot". Association Army warriors torched Randolph in striking back for the guerrilla assault. To his prevalent officer, General Ulysses S. Allow, Sherman revealed that he had "given open notice that a redundancy [of guerrilla attacks] will legitimize any proportions of striking back". Randolph was torched a second time by government fighters in 1865. 

Randolph is situated at . The height above ocean level is . 

The surface soil in the Randolph territory is made generally out of sediment topsoil of various characteristics and at various phases of disintegration. About 15% of the surface soil comprises of "Adler sediment topsoil" with a slant of 0–1%, found in the much of the time overwhelmed fields at Randolph. About 20% of the dirt is seriously disintegrated "Memphis sediment topsoil" with 12–25% slants, and ca. 35% of the dirt comprises of "Memphis sediment topsoil" with 20–40% inclines. Under 8% comprises of respectably disintegrated "Memphis residue soil" with inclines from 1–5%. The staying surface soil is made out of different residues, sands or muds, including "Robinsonville fine sandy topsoil" (ca. 6%) and "Tunica earth" (ca. 1.5%). Around 1.5% of the region is secured by water. The parent material of the "Memphis sediment topsoil" is Pleistocene loess. Loess is a fine-grained, somewhat intelligent, silty, windblown residue. Disintegrated loess comprises of incredibly fine, sandy particles and structures residue in situations that give adequate dampness of the dirt, more often than not brought about by intermittent flooding or precipitation. Soil got from dissolved loess is some of the time likewise alluded to as loess. 

The settlement of Randolph is arranged over the second Chickasaw Bluff, on the eastern bank of the Mississippi River in Tipton County. The four Chickasaw Bluffs are high grounds over the Mississippi River flood fields, made out of dissolved pre-noteworthy loess over chilly rock. The Chickasaw Bluffs west of the network, on the banks of the Mississippi River, and level cotton-handle east of Randolph overwhelm the country scene encompassing the settlement. 

Over the most recent 150 years, the general scene around Randolph has not changed much. In 1862, the hinterland of the town is depicted to be "brimming with gorges and canyons". Gorges and crevasses are valleys or ravines cut from the scene as a result of disintegration, brought about by a stream or waterway or via regular precipitation, piping water towards less raised areas of the waste bowl. The scene cut into the dirt of the Mississippi River feigns by water disintegration for a considerable length of time is as yet present in current occasions. 

In 1833, a stagecoach street from Randolph to Jackson in Madison County, east of Randolph, was built up. The prior to the war course associated the two towns just as the towns en route two times each week. Randolph and Memphis were associated by an immediate travel course later during the 1830s. The street was a piece of a mail line among Jackson and Memphis in Shelby County on which mail was conveyed week after week on horseback. The precise directing of the section among Randolph and Memphis is obscure. A part of the course bearing the previous name, about long, was in presence until around 2005. The rest of the bit of Old Randolph Road was situated about north of the mouth of the Wolf River and east of the Mississippi River, only south of the mouth of the Loosahatchie River in Memphis. Starting at 2010, the rest of the piece of Old Randolph Road is demolished, the arrive on which the notable mail course was found is utilized as a modern property. A production dated 1862, reports that Randolph is "drew nearer in the back by a few decent streets". 

In 2008, Randolph is situated close "great streets" just as it was amid the Civil War, with the exemption that cutting edge streets in the region are cleared generally. U.S. Highway 51 passes Randolph in the southeast and Tennessee State Route 59 (TN 59) passes southeast of the town. Four streets at area level unite at Randolph, as appeared in the table beneath. A segment of Ballard Slough Road is situated in the flood fields, this portion is inclined to flooding and unpaved. 

Randolph is situated on the eastern bank of the Mississippi River, only south of the lower mouth of the Hatchie River. During the 1820s, the Hatchie River at Randolph was available to steamboats for upriver to Bolivar in Hardeman County. 

The United States Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) is the government office in charge of safe waters and flood security, among numerous other peacetime and wartime errands. From 2005 to 2007, the USACE burned through $9,773,662 to guarantee the route of the Mississippi River at Randolph for vessels and freight ships and to give flood assurance to the quickly encompassing territories of the town. Contracts incorporate looking over and mapping, building and development, just as assignments identified with protection and improvement of the Mississippi River and the stream bowl at Randolph. Support related ventures incorporate digging of the safe channel of the Mississippi River at Randolph to expel sedimented sand and mud. Undertakings identified with preservation incorporate barrier development to shield low-lying territories at Randolph from flooding and ensuing disintegration. The "Route Bulletin No. 2", issued by the USACE in 2006, portrays a stone embankment development at Randolph with an inexact height of at waterway mile 770L. 

Situated on the southeastern edge of the New Madrid Seismic Zone, the settlement of Randolph is arranged in a zone with a high quake chance. Somewhere in the range of 1974 and 2004, ten quakes have been recorded in a span of around Randolph. The size of the quakes ran from 1.5 to 3.2 on the Richter scale. The hypocenter profundity extended from to . In a similar timeframe, at a sweep of around Randolph, forty five seismic tremors have been accounted for with extents running from 1.0 to 3.2 at a profundity between and . The most astounding extent quake recorded in the region since 1974 happened on August 19, 1994 – the earthquake was estimated 3.2 on the Richter scale with a focal point at directions , ca. west of Randolph, at a profundity of . 

On January 16, 2009 at 3:09 p.m. neighborhood time (21:09 UTC), "a little seismic tremor shook segments of Tipton County". The quake was estimated at a size 2.8 on the Richter scale. As indicated by the Center for Earthquake Research and Information (CERI), the focal point of the quake was accounted for to be at directions at a profundity of . There were no reports of harm brought about by the seismic tremor. The area of the focal point was close to the principal Chickasaw Bluff, about east of Fort Pillow State Park and ca. upper east of Randolph. Littler tremors along the New Madrid Seismic Zone are normal. 

Randolph is situated in a muggy subtropical atmosphere zone. The atmosphere is described by sweltering, damp summers and crisp to gentle winters. Huge measures of precipitation happen in all seasons. At Randolph, July is the hottest month on the normal. In 1930, the most astounding recorded temperature was estimated at . January is the coolest month on the normal. In 1951, the most reduced recorded temperature was estimated at . Precipitation tops in December on the normal. The table underneath showcases the normal month to month high and low temperatures and precipitation at Randolph. 

Farming is the prevailing wellspring of pay in the zone encompassing Randolph, particularly the development of cotton. Corn, beans and peas were additionally developed amid the only remaining century . After the annulment of servitude in 1865, sharecropping was the essential methods for money for low pay families in the zone. For the most part for the development of cotton, land would be utilized by tenant farmers as a byproduct of an offer of the harvest to the landowner. Present day machines, for example, the cotton picker have made the manual development out of date after some time as they assumed control over the work from the unskilled workers. 

In 2008, Randolph has a populace of c. 200, and comprises of around two dozen abodes. The economy of the rustic network is ruled by horticulture with no real ventures and organizations present. 

In 1834, Reverend Samuel R. Davidson turned into the principal minister at Randolph. He was selected by the "Tennessee Conference" of the United Methodist Church. After his arrangement as a minister of the network, an assemblage conformed to Davidson and fabricated a congregation at Randolph. The second church at Randolph was worked by the gathering in 1883. In 1953, development of another congregation was finished, the structure was renovated in 1975 and fills in as a position of love for the Methodist assembly of Randolph starting at 2008. 

The United Methodist Church at Randolph had 78 ministers starting at 1983. In 2008, Reverend Thomas M. Yoder and Reverend Ben Rainey are the designated ministers at the Randolph Methodist people group. Randolph United Methodist Church is situated at 98 Ballard Slough Road. The love participation for the congregation is accounted for as 76 individuals from the assembly on the normal. 

Randolph Assembly of God is a second spot of love in the town, the congregation was established in 2001. In 2008, the assemblage is driven by Pastor Larry Rose and Pastor Frank Russell. Randolph Assembly of God is situated at 1135 Randolph Road. 

On October 11, 2008, the Tennessee Parks and Greenways Foundation, a non-benefit association, devoted Randolph Bluff Historic Park in a festival with lawmakers, preservationists, history specialists and network individuals. The property on the second Chickasaw Bluff was obtained for $378,000. The recreation center is proposed to advance the Civil War history of the network and make the exceptional perspectives on the Mississippi River accessible to a more extensive open, extra income from the travel industry is normal for the network. Once "Randolph Bluff Historic Park" is done, it will be a piece of the Mississippi River Corridor Tennessee, a task to "make a beautiful byway that interfaces noteworthy locales along the Mississippi River", the undertaking likewise advances practical improvement and the protection of land and natural life in the Tennessee regions flanking the Mississippi River. 

Young lady Scouts Heart of the South is a young lady scout association serving 16,500 young ladies in the Memphis metropolitan zone, incorporating districts in West Tennessee, North Mississippi and Crittenden County, Arkansas. Young lady Scouts Heart of the South works six camps and one instructional hub in their general vicinity of inclusion, incorporating a property in Tipton County, "Camp Annemeekee". The scout camp is situated on Girl Scout Road south of Randolph. 

A mail station was set up at Randolph in 1827. The Randolph Post Office was in activity until 1932. The precise area of the mail station at Randolph is obscure. 

In 2008, the U.S. Postal division for Randolph is 38015 (Burlison, Tennessee). The phone territory code is 901 (Memphis metro region).