Izuna 2: The Unemployed Ninja Returns 

Izuna 2: The Unemployed Ninja Returns, discharged in Japan as , is a prison crawler computer game created by Ninja Studio and distributed in Japan by Success and in North America by Atlus for the Nintendo DS handheld diversion support. It is the continuation of "" and was discharged in Japan on November 29, 2007 and in North America on July 22, 2008. 

Like the principal amusement, "Izuna 2" centers around the undertakings of Izuna and her companions. Shino, Izuna's companion, vanishes amidst a wedding, so Izuna goes on a journey to discover her. Izuna discovers her, just to find that Shino was searching for her sister, Shizune, so Izuna and her gathering choose to help scan for Shizune. Yet, by searching for Shizune, Izuna infuriates a gathering of remote divine beings, who endeavor to keep her from rejoining with Shizune. 

"Izuna 2", like the first "Izuna" amusement, is a prison crawler. The player controls Izuna or different characters and investigates haphazardly created cells. Every prison has different floors that should be cleared, and a considerable lot of these cells have managers that must be vanquished. The player deals with a wellbeing bar; if the wellbeing bar is drained, the player bites the dust and is compelled to come back to town. Kicking the bucket, a typical event in the diversion, will make the player lose all cash and things being conveyed, however the player won't lose involvement or levels. The wellbeing bar refills consistently every turn. To keep players from staying set up to reestablish wellbeing unreasonably, a "SP bar" was included. It always exhausts per turn and a drained SP bar diminishes the player's assault control. The amusement is turn-based; the player can play out an activity, for example, moving, utilizing a thing, or assaulting, and each other foe in the prison will play out an activity also. The amusement incorporates numerous pretending computer game components, for example, equippable things, details, and experience focuses to step up. 

Gear, things, and charms can be found in cells. Their area and impacts are arbitrarily created. Gear comes in a few classes: scuffle hardware, for example, swords, paws, arms, dolls, and boots, or went weapons, for example, boomerangs and retires from. Things come in a few kinds including pills, shuriken, kunai blades, bombs, caltrops, and helpful things that recuperate wellbeing or SP. Charms can "stick," or be connected, to gear to include capacities or details. A weapon can just have a set number of charms adhered to it. Charms can likewise be utilized to cast enchantment, which utilizes SP. 

"Izuna 2" likewise incorporates a "tag" framework not found in the past diversion. The player enters prisons with two characters, enabling the player to keep investigating the cell even after the main character has kicked the bucket. The player can switch characters in diversion amid a battle through this framework. Furthermore, the player can utilize the auxiliary character related to the essential character to dispatch an amazing double assault. 

Ichika, a fisherwoman from the past diversion, has plans to get hitched. Nonetheless, amid the night prior to Ichika's marriage, Shino, Izuna's closest companion, vanishes. Izuna hysterically attempts to discover her and rapidly finds her. Shino uncovers that she was looking for her sister, Shizune, so Izuna and her companions choose to help Shino discover Shizune. 

Izuna enrolls the assistance of the divine forces of Katamari Village, whom she supported in the past diversion. Master Takushiki, one of the divine beings, uncovers that both Shizune and Izuna are "versatile holy places", or individuals who enable the divine beings to leave their home towns. Since the presence of two compact places of worship in one zone would cause strife among divine beings, Takushiki sent Shizune to another district as a youngster. The remote divine beings and their animals from that district, mononokes, pursued Shizune into Izuna's country. 

In the wake of overcoming a few outside divine beings, Izuna effectively reunites Shino and Shizune. Be that as it may, by crushing the remote divine beings, Izuna incenses the Dark Prince, the pioneer of these divine beings. Izuna is compelled to overcome the Dark Prince. Subsequent to doing as such, she persuades him to come back to his country, enabling harmony to come back to the district. 

As per the designer blog, the limitation procedure for "Izuna 2" was "shockingly uncomplicated" and the first gone through took not exactly a month. Achievement, the Japanese designer, gave Atlus, the North American engineers, with efficient records, which helped make the interpretation and altering fast and simple. Be that as it may, the quality confirmation and investigating process was a "bad dream" because of the idea of the amusement and the randomized generating of animals. Moreover, the group took a gander at the bugs found by Japanese players and endeavored to reproduce each detailed bug. This exertion was damaged by the absence of an investigate menu, however debuggers had the capacity to utilize both a one-hit murder alternative and a story skipping choice. Sadly, the one-hit murder choice did not make a difference to the supervisors, so debuggers still needed to granulate to increase enough dimensions to overcome the managers. Altogether, six authority analyzers found 104 framework type bugs and 259 content bugs. 

On the Japanese discharge date of "Izuna 2", Success sorted out a progression of style occasions at different stores in Akihabara. Cosplayers could go after prizes by taking on the appearance of either Izuna or Shino. Also, performing artists and individuals from the structure staff took care of field questions and sign signatures. The diversion was additionally made accessible at Comiket 73 between December 21 and December 23, 2007. 

In North America, Atlus at first reported designs to discharge an English form on April 17, 2008. Atlus discharged a trailer of the diversion in April 2008, and in May 2008, "Izuna 2" showed up at the 2008 Run to the Sun show in California. A challenge was additionally held in the U.S. to help advance the discharge. Fans were approached to add content to a progression of pictures including cooperations between various characters and could win a free duplicate of "Izuna 2" and the majority of the blurbs given away as limited time things with the amusement. 

"Izuna 2" was discharged in a few distinct holders. Sofmap, a Japanese retailer, discharged an authority's crate delineating Izuna and Shino washing in an "onsen", reflecting the structure of many "eroge" amusements. Every American discharge contained one of two centerfold girl styled scaled down notices of Izuna. Duplicates of the amusement bought through either GameStop or Amazon each incorporated an extra, retailer-elite scaled down blurb. 

"Izuna 2" got "blended or normal audits" as per computer game survey aggregator Metacritic. Numerous commentators indicated the amusement's "quintessential roguelike RPG" nature as a downside since it required a lot of pounding to advance in the diversion, however a few pundits delighted in the trouble of the diversion. 

Analysts were additionally part with their impressions of the "tag" framework. GameShark observed it to be a "decent bend" while RPGFan observed it to be "immaterial and not great." Nintendo World Report called "Izuna 2" "a good and fun cell crawler" damaged for the most part by its interactivity mechanics and baffling illustrations. They additionally called attention to that the amusement is focused at "quite certain gamer group". In like manner, "GamePro" remarked that the diversion "may demonstrate excessively testing to easygoing DS gamers who are simply searching for a snappy round of fun" and would no doubt fit best for "DS proprietors searching for an in-your-face cell slithering background." regardless of this, they found that the amusement had a few prominent positive angles, including a "strong" control plan and "all around done" Japanese voice acting and English subtitling. "X-Play" indicated the diversion's "unique visual style and an eccentric comical inclination" as qualities that recognized the amusement from roguelikes. They significantly delighted in the exchange and voice acting and felt that the amusement "shouldn't get lost" among other prison crawlers discharged to the DS. Nonetheless, 1UP.com found that the "amusingly droll storyline" was the main bring up emerged against prison crawlers, however the diversion was "an impressive improvement" over the first. As a rule, 1UP.com suspected the diversion was "a test implied for in-your-face RPG aficionados yet sufficiently diverting that newcomers may think that its beneficial, as well." Likewise, IGN remarked that the amusement would take "an unmistakable gamer to nestle up to this adorable, comedic experience" and brought up that the amusement was "most impossible of continuations." as opposed to 1UP.com, IGN observed the diversion to be "without a doubt business as usual," prompting similar advantages and downsides.