Homer the Whopper 

"Homer the Whopper" is the season debut of "The Simpsons"<nowiki>'</nowiki> twenty-first season. It initially disclosed on the Fox arrange in the United States on September 27, 2009. In the scene, Comic Book Guy makes another hero called Everyman who takes powers from different superheroes. Homer is given a role as the lead in the film adjustment. To get Homer into shape, the motion picture studio enlists a VIP wellness mentor, Lyle McCarthy, to support him. Homer gets into extraordinary shape and is truly energized, yet when McCarthy departs to prepare another customer, he begins once again eating again and eventually this prompts the film's disappointment. 

The scene was composed by Seth Rogen and Evan Goldberg, who are "fixated" devotees of the show, and coordinated by Lance Kramer. "Homer The Whopper" was planned to be an analysis on how Hollywood treats superhuman movies. Rogen additionally visitor stars in the scene as the character Lyle McCarthy, making him the second visitor star to both compose a scene and show up in it; Ricky Gervais was the first. "Homer the Whopper" has gotten blended audits from TV faultfinders and gained a Nielsen rating of 4.3 in its unique communicate. 

Bart and Milhouse persuade Comic Book Guy to distribute a comic book he composed titled Everyman, in which the title character can assimilate superpowers from the characters of comic book he contacts. The comic turns into a moment hit, and numerous Hollywood studios become keen on making it into a film. Comic Book Guy consents to give Everyman a chance to turn into a motion picture, yet just in the event that he can pick the star. At the point when Comic Book Guy sees Homer, he thinks about Homer ideal for the job, as he needs Everyman to be played by a moderately aged chubby man. In any case, the studio administrators understand that groups of onlookers need a physically fit on-screen character for the job, so they procure big name wellness coach Lyle McCarthy to get Homer into shape. Following a month, Homer ends up fit and the film starts generation. 

Before long a short time later, in any case, McCarthy departs Homer for another customer. Without McCarthy to keep him fit as a fiddle, Homer begins eating again and restores all the weight. Homer can never again fit into his ensemble or even his trailer, and the motion picture starts to go over spending plan. The studio officials and Comic Book Guy stress that the film won't be effective. The last form of the film highlights scenes with the fat Homer and the physically fit Homer blended, irritating and befuddling the gathering of people. After the debut of the film, McCarthy returns and offers to get Homer into shape once more, which Homer acknowledges. The studio officials offer to give Comic Book A chance to fellow direct the spin-off, depending on the prerequisite that Comic Book Guy lie to the fans and state he preferred the movie. In spite of the fact that satisfied by the offer, Comic Book Guy rejects it and straightforwardly condemns the film on the web, and subsequently it turns into a film industry disappointment and Everyman is never adjusted again. 

Seth Rogen and Evan Goldberg, essayists of the film "Superbad", are "fixated" aficionados of "The Simpsons". Subsequent to discovering that "The Simpsons" official maker James L. Rivulets was a fanatic of "Superbad", they chose to solicit the makers from the show on the off chance that they could compose a scene. In 2006, Ricky Gervais, co-maker of "The Office", got credit for composing the season 17 scene "Homer Simpson, This Is Your Wife". Rogen and Goldberg "thought whether [Gervais] got the opportunity to keep in touch with one, perhaps [they] could attempt." They were welcome to "The Simpsons" journalists room, where they pitched a few scene thoughts. One was acknowledged, and they composed a layout with the assistance of some criticism from the standard essayists. 

Rogen remarked that he and Goldberg needed to appear with the scene how Hollywood for the most part ruins superhuman movies. He said that "the entire joke is that Homer is cast to play a person who's an everyman and they attempt to make him into this physically fit person." Rogen likewise noticed that the plot reflects the circumstance he was in while taking a shot at the film "The Green Hornet", when he needed to get more fit and do physical preparing for his job. Show sprinter Al Jean remarked that the authors made an effort not to rehash the comic book film subject from the "Radioactive Man" scene. Rather they chose to spoof the way that pretty much every comic book has been transformed into a film. Jean remarked that that scene in the scene in which the studio administrators "are attempting to brainstorm a thought that hasn't been done truly is the thing that they are doing nowadays [in genuine life]." 

The table read occurred in August 2008, and generation on the scene started not long after that. Rogen later said that "we sat down for a read-through and after three hours I'm in a studio comedy ing with Homer Simpson, it was the single most prominent day of my life." Rogen additionally visitor stars in the scene as the character Lyle McCarthy, making him the second visitor star to both compose a scene and show up in it; Gervais likewise showed up in the scene he composed. "The Simpsons" maker Matt Groening likewise shows up in the scene. 

In its unique American communicate in the United States on September 27, 2009, "Homer The Whopper" was viewed in 8.31 million homes and obtained a 4.3 Nielsen rating/12% offer. The rating was down seven percent from the past season's debut, which was seen in 9.3 million homes the night it broadcast. 

Since airing, "Homer The Whopper" has gotten blended to positive audits from TV pundits. Steve Fritz of Newsarama called the scene "stunning" and remarked that the "general comic book subject was flawless." Reviewers for "television Guide" refered to Matt Groening's appearance, the supper table scene, Homer attempting to get in shape at the Kwik-E-Mart, and the opening scene where Bart interrogates Comic Book Guy concerning Spider-Man as the features of the scene. 

Robert Canning of IGN was certain about "Homer The Whopper", giving it a 8.6/10 rating. He remarked that the principal demonstration of the scene was the most grounded, while the others were flimsier. Canning trusted the explanation behind this was the watchers have just observed Homer "battle with his weight on many occasions, and Rogen's mentor, however interesting a great part of the time, will probably never be recognized as an exemplary visitor job." He included, in any case, that Rogen and Goldberg can locate "a couple of new edges with the weight jokes, so it is anything but a total misfortune." Overall, Canning thought "Homer The Whopper" was a decent begin to the twenty-first season, and despite the fact that the plot may not be extremely unique, the essayists included "freshness to the procedures." "The A.V. Club"s Todd VanDerWerff did not think the content was comparable to Gervais', yet remarked that Rogen and Goldberg "figured out how to make a for the most part diverting season debut." He included that he thought the Hollywood ridiculing highlighted in this scene had been abused on the show, yet "the explicitness of what the [episode] was making fun of—trainers who help stars thin down (for this situation, helping Homer thin down)—went far toward making the scene satisfactory." VanDerWerff reasoned that while the scene "didn’t have a go at anything new [...], [he] played around with it all the equivalent."