SM U-11 (Austria-Hungary) 

SM "U-11 or U-XI was an in the Austro-Hungarian Navy ( or ) amid World War I. She was initially a German Type UB I submarine authorized into the German Imperial Navy () as SM "UB-15. 

SM "UB-15" was built in Germany and delivered by rail to Pola, where she was collected and propelled. She was appointed into the German Imperial Navy in April and sank an Italian submarine in June. The vessel was given over to Austria-Hungary and charged as SM "U-11" on 14 June. In mid 1916, "U-11" terminated on a British submarine, however missed. After the finish of the war, "U-11" was given over to Italy as a war reparation and rejected at Pola by 1920. 

"U-11" was a little beach front submarine that dislodged surfaced and submerged. She included a solitary shaft, a solitary Kăśrting diesel motor for surface running, and a solitary electric engine for submerged travel. "U-11" was equipped for up to while surfaced and keeping in mind that submerged at a jumping profundity of up to . She was intended for a team of 17 officers and men. 

"U-11" was outfitted with two torpedo tubes situated in the front and conveyed a supplement of two torpedoes. German Type UB I submarines were also outfitted with an assault rifle, yet it isn't obvious from sources if "U-11"a previous German boatwas fitted with one, or on the off chance that it was, held it in Austro-Hungarian administration. In October 1916, "U-11"s deadly implement was enhanced with a/18 (2.6â in) firearm. 

"UB-15" was set down on 9 November 1914 at AG Weser in Bremen. The submarine was transported by rail in areas to Pola, where the segments were bolted together. There is no known enduring record of to what extent it took for UB-15's segments to be collected. Notwithstanding, a comparative ship () was worked in about fourteen days. 

SM "UB-15" was dispatched into the German Imperial Navy under the direction of "Oberleutnant zur See" Heino von Heimburg on 11 April. An Austro-Hungarian Navy officer was doled out to the vessel for steering and preparing purposes. On 10 June, "UB-15" sank the Italian submarine "Medusa" for lost 245 tons off Porto di Piave Vecchia in the Northern Adriatic. Like all Type UB I and U-10 class submarines, "UB-15" was outfitted with remunerating tanks intended to flood and balance the loss of one of the C/06 torpedoes. In any case, they didn't generally work effectively; when terminating from periscope profundity the pontoon could suggest subsequent to terminating or, if an excess of weight was taken on, dive to the profundities. At the point when "UB-15" torpedoed and sank "Medusa", the tank neglected to appropriately redress, driving the majority of the crew members to raced to the stern to balance the trim irregularity and keep the ship from sinking. 

On 18 June, "UB-15" was given over to the Austro-Hungarian Navy and authorized as "U-11" under the direction of "Linienschiffsleutnant" Lăźdwig Eberhardt. "U-11" held its German group until 18 June 1916, when they were supplanted by an all Austro-Hungarian one. In mid 1916, "U-11" fruitlessly assaulted the British submarine in the Gulf of Fiume. "U-11" sank no boats in her Austro-Hungarian administration, and was given over to Italy as a war reparation and rejected at Pola by 1920.