Blue Ridge Road 

Blue Ridge Road is a long roadway in Essex County, New York, in the United States. The street is assigned as County Routeâ 84 (CRÂ 84) from NYÂ 28N in Newcomb to Interstateâ 87 (I-87) in North Hudson, and as New York State RouteÂ 910K (NYÂ 910K) between I-87 and U.S. Routeâ 9 (USÂ 9) in North Hudson. The CRÂ 84 parcel is a , two-path stretch of rustic roadway kept up by the Essex County Department of Public Works' Highway Division while NYÂ 910K is an interstate kept up by the New York State Department of Transportation (NYSDOT). All of Blue Ridge Road has been assigned as the "Blue Ridge Road Scenic Byway" by NYSDOT. 

Blue Ridge Road was assigned as a feature of NYÂ 73 in the 1930 renumbering of state courses in New York. NYÂ 73 was truncated to Schroon in the mid-1930s. 

Blue Ridge Road comprises of Essex County's CRÂ 84, which makes the mass out of the course, and NYÂ 910K, which is a short, state-kept up roadway interfacing I-87 to USÂ 9. The aggregate of Blue Ridge Road is assigned as the "Blue Ridge Road Scenic Byway", a New York State Scenic Byway, by NYSDOT. 

Blue Ridge Road starts at a convergence with NYÂ 28N and CRÂ 75 (Eaton Lane) in the zone south of Tahawus (articulated "ta-hawz"). The street heads toward the upper east, at first paralleling the Hudson River, at that point crosses with CRÂ 25 (Tahawus Road), which travels north to the villa of Tahawus. From that point forward, the course wanders from the Hudson River, swinging toward the southeast and climbing somewhat to the side of Pine Hill, before advancing downhill. At the base of the mountain, CRÂ 84 traverses Vanderwhacker Brook, which streams into adjacent Vanderwhacker Pond. The street winds its way around a few distinctive mountain tops, going toward the north of Cheney Pond. 

In the wake of going through the villa of Boreas River, CRÂ 84 quickly pursues Wolf Pond Brook, which in the end turns north for adjacent Wolf Pond. The street proceeds with eastbound past Sand Pond and starts to dive, generally following Sand Pond Brook. It goes along the base of Ragged Mountain, a crest in the Adirondacks, after which the street keeps running along the edge of the valley of the stream known as "The Branch." At the base of Three Brothers Mountain, CRÂ 84 bends upper east before making a swing toward the southeast, before long entering the villa of Blue Ridge. 

With The Branch as yet paralleling toward the south, CRÂ 84 proceeds with its eastbound plunge and in the end converges with its first street in a few miles, Lazy Street, which gives access to the brook. At the base of Nippletop Mountain, Blue Ridge Road goes along the north shore of Palmer Pond, a little lake obvious from the Adirondack Northway (I-87). Before long, Blue Ridge Road converges with the slopes prompting and from the Northway and the district kept up segment of Blue Ridge Road closes. 

The eastern end of Blue Ridge Road, starting at the inclines to and from the Adirondack Northway, is kept up by NYSDOT as NYÂ 910K. The course travels eastbound from the Northway slopes to close-by USÂ 9. On this stretch, there is one middle of the road crossing point, this being with an anonymous roadway. The course finishes at USÂ 9 in the village of North Hudson. 

The aggregate of Blue Ridge Road was assigned as the westernmost part of NYÂ 73 in the 1930 renumbering of state expressways in New York. NYÂ 73 at first kept running from NYÂ 28N east to a crossing point with USÂ 9 in North Hudson, where NYÂ 73 swung south to pursue USÂ 9 toward Schroon. The course was truncated to start at USÂ 9 in Schroon. NYÂ 73's previous arrangement along Blue Ridge Road was redesignated as CRÂ 2B by 1969. The area between the Northway and USÂ 9 was later exchanged to the state and relegated the NYÂ 910K assignment. On Mayâ 21, 2009, New York Governor David Paterson declared that improvement cash from the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act would be utilized to recreate the CRÂ 84 fragment of the Blue Ridge Road, considering it to be a noteworthy connector from NYÂ 28N to I-87.