Furthermore, Maggie Makes Three 

"Furthermore, Maggie Makes Three" is the thirteenth scene of "The Simpsons"<nowiki>'</nowiki> 6th season. It initially broadcast on the Fox organize in the United States on January 22, 1995. In the scene, Homer describes the account of Maggie's introduction to the world when the children inquire as to why there are no photographs of her in the family collection. 

The scene was composed by Jennifer Crittenden, and coordinated by Swinton O. Scott III. This was both Crittenden and Scott's first scene on "The Simpsons". It highlights social references to TV arrangement, for example, "The Mary Tyler Moore Show" and "Knight Rider". Since airing, the scene has gotten numerous positive surveys from fans and TV commentators, and has been designated "a contacting take a gander at parenthood" by Kevin Wong of PopMatters. It gained a Nielsen rating of 10.3, and was the fourth most astounding appraised appear on the Fox organize the week it disclosed. 

While perusing through the family photograph collection, Lisa sees that there are no infant pictures of Maggie. Homer clarifies by relating the tale of Maggie's introduction to the world. In 1993, Homer detested working at the Springfield Nuclear Power Plant, and had a fantasy of working at a bowling alley. After he got a check that cleared him of every one of his obligations, he quit his place of employment at the power plant and mortified Mr. Consumes amid his flight. Homer found another line of work at Barney's Uncle Al's nearby bowling alley, despite the fact that this brought about Barney getting terminated. 

Whenever Homer and Marge "cuddled" to commend this advancement, she ended up pregnant, demolishing Homer's monetary plans. Homer, who is ignorant of Marge's pregnancy, is the most joyful he has been a major part of his life working at the bowling alley. Despite the fact that Marge made Patty and Selma guarantee not to let him know, they told two individuals known for tattling, and by the following day the whole city of Springfield knew. Homer by the by stayed absent to the conspicuous clues, including Moe straightforwardly saluting him for getting Marge pregnant and returning home to a child shower. At the point when Maude unexceptionally saluted him on his new activity, in any case, Homer all of a sudden understood reality and turned out to be very upset over the looming birth. 

At Marge's proposal, Homer approached Al for a raise; in spite of the fact that Al clarified that the back street was not making a sufficient benefit for this, he concurred if Homer could figure out how to expand business triple. After fruitlessly considering showcasing, Homer endeavored to attract regard for the bowling alley by running outside and discharging a shotgun before a group, causing a gigantic frenzy and a substantial police reaction. Unfit to finish his guarantee, Homer relinquished his activity and comes back to the power plant. In any case, Mr. Consumes influenced Homer to ask for his activity back, and set an expansive plaque before Homer's work area perusing: "Remember: no doubt about it". Homer was by and by despondent at his work, however Maggie was conceived, Homer in a split second began to look all starry eyed at her. Back in the present, Bart Lisa still don't comprehend what that has to do with Maggie's photographs. Homer simply makes reference to that they are in where he needs them the most. The scene at that point slices to his work environment where the majority of the photographs of Maggie are situated on the plaque on the divider, which currently peruses: "Do it for her". 

The scene was composed by Jennifer Crittenden, and coordinated by Swinton O. Scott III. This was the primary scene Scott coordinated for the show. Crittenden additionally made her presentation as an author for "The Simpsons" in this scene. Crittenden was taking a tenderfoots' composition program at twentieth Century Fox when previous "The Simpsons" showrunner David Mirkin contracted her on the show. Crittenden's solitary composition experience before that had been as an assistant on the "Late Show with David Letterman". twentieth Century Fox acquainted Crittenden with Mirkin, and Mirkin read a content of hers that he preferred. At the point when Mirkin first conversed with Crittenden, he thought she was an extremely pleasant lady who was full grown. Crittenden was just 23 years of age at the time, yet Mirkin preferred her and he procured her. 

After Homer leaves his place of employment at the power plant, he viciously hurls his old supervisor Mr. Wears out of the truck he is driving. Homer at that point drives over a wooden scaffold and hurls a match onto it; the entire extension is right away inundated on fire. Mirkin thought of the joke, and said that "the thing with movement is that you can organize nearly anything and time it flawlessly, something you would not have the capacity to do in cutting edge". As a cutting edge chief, Mirkin said he appreciates the measure of control they have in movement. 

In the scene, Mr. Consumes places a "de-persuasive plaque" in Homer's station that peruses "Remember: no doubt about it". Homer at that point places photographs of Maggie around the plaque to change it into saying "Do it for her". "The Simpsons" author George Meyer, who appreciates composing jokes that include re-arranged words or some other types of word play, thought of the thought for this specific joke. The joke is additionally a respect to Al Jaffee's Fold-in highlights in the "Frantic" magazine. 

On September 4, 2018, 23 years after the scene's unique communicate, Simpsons maker Matt Selman posted a tweet saying that he had seen a progression blunder in the scene. At the point when Marge declares to Homer that she is pregnant with Maggie, a photograph of the infant can be found out of sight. 

The love seat choke is a reference to the James Bond weapon barrel arrangement. Dr. Hibbert's flashback haircut is designed according to Arsenio Hall's. The family watches "Knight Boat", a satire of "Knight Rider". Homer turning around with a bowling ball in his grasp before tossing it into the air and shouting "I'm going to make it all things considered" is reminiscent of the opening of "The Mary Tyler Moore Show" where Mary tosses her cap into the air. 

In its unique communicate, "And Maggie Makes Three" completed 47th in the evaluations for the seven day stretch of January 16 to January 22, 1995, with a Nielsen rating of 10.3. The scene was the fourth most noteworthy evaluated appear on the Fox arrange that week, beaten just by "Melrose Place", "Beverly Hills, 90210", and the "Stone 'n' Roll Skating Championship". 

Since airing, the scene has gotten numerous positive audits from fans and TV commentators. Once "The Simpsons" essayist and entertainer Ricky Gervais named it his second most loved scene, and stated: "Mr. Consumes gives [Homer] this horrendous plaque over his work area that says, 'Remember: You're here everlastingly.' It's about how here and there things don't go the manner in which you arranged, which is truly astounding in an animation. Homer at that point sets up every one of the photos of Maggie he's at any point taken to deliberately cover this frightful thing so it currently peruses, 'Do it for her.' It gives me a bump in the throat pondering it." Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood, the writers of the book "I Can't Believe It's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide", stated: "A shockingly customary scene. The flashback to 1993 appears somewhat odd, however this is a genuine case of a story that doesn't excessively depend on set pieces and frustrated desires for its prosperity." In an audit of the 6th season, Joshua Klein of the "Chicago Tribune" refered to "And Maggie Makes Three", "Treehouse of Horror V", "Homer Badman", and "Lisa's Rival" among his most loved scenes of the period. 

Television Squad's Adam Finley said the scene "figures out how to be both staggeringly clever and inconceivably contacting, the two indications of an incredible "Simpsons" scene". He included that "the scene has some incredible stiflers in it, however the feeling is genuine, as well. Homer isn't excited with having an infant, and the scene completes an awesome activity of appearing clouded side of having another mouth to encourage." Colin Jacobson at DVD Movie Guide said in an audit of the 6th season DVD: "Flashback scenes of "The Simpsons" more often than not function admirably, and [this episode] is no exemption to that standard. As a matter of fact, now it’s one of my top picks, however that’s halfway in light of overexposure to a portion of different scenes. Regardless, this one has numerous funny minutes –, for example, the scene that clarifies Homer's male pattern baldness." Kevin Wong at PopMatters said the scene is "a contacting take a gander at parenthood".