SM U-23 (Austria-Hungary) 

SM "U-23 or U-XXIII" was an or U-vessel worked for and worked by the Austro-Hungarian Navy ( or ) amid the First World War. The plan for "U-23" depended on submarines of the Royal Danish Navy's "Havmanden" class (three of which had been worked in Austria-Hungary), and was to a great extent out of date by the start of the war. 

"U-23" was simply over long and was equipped with two bow torpedo tubes, a deck weapon, and an assault rifle. In February 1918, "U-23" was sunk with all hands by the Italian torpedo vessel "Airone" while endeavoring an assault on the Italian transport . "U-23" had no wartime victories. 

When it wound up clear to the Austro-Hungarian Navy that the First World War would not be a short one, they moved to support their U-vessel armada by catching the designs for the Danish "Havmanden" class submarines, three of which had been worked at Whitehead and Co. in Fiume. Despite the fact that the Austro-Hungarian Navy was not content with the structure, which was to a great extent old, it was the main plan for which plans were accessible and which could be started promptly in household shipyards. The Austro-Hungarian Navy apathetically set requests for "U-23" and her three sister vessels on 27 March 1915. 

"U-23" was one of two vessels of the class to be worked at the Hungarian yard in Fiume. Because of requests by the Hungarian government, subcontracts for the class were separated among Hungarian and Austrian firms, and this politically convenient arrangement exacerbated specialized issues with the plan, bringing about various changes and postponements for the class when all is said in done. 

"U-23" was a maritime submarine that uprooted surfaced and submerged and was intended for a supplement of 18. She was long with a light emission a draft of . For impetus, she included a solitary shaft, a solitary diesel motor for surface running, and a solitary electric engine for submerged travel. She was able to do while surfaced and keeping in mind that submerged. In spite of the fact that there is no particular documentation of a range for "U-23", the "Havmanden" class, whereupon the "U-20" class was based, had a scope of at , surfaced, and at submerged. 

"U-23" was furnished with two torpedo tubes situated in the front and conveyed a supplement of two torpedoes. She was additionally furnished with a/26 deck weapon and an automatic rifle. 

"U-23" was propelled on 5 January 1917, however It isn't known with sureness when "U-23" was charged. Creator Paul Halpern reports that "U-23" and her three sisters all entered administration among August and November 1917. In spite of the fact that there are no particular reports of issues with "U-23", the "U-20" class all in all experienced problematic motors which aggravated the poor taking care of qualities of the vessels. 

On 21 February 1918, "Linienschiffsleutnant" Klemens Ritter von Băšzard, "U-23"s just boss, was managing the pontoon in an assault on the Italian transport in the Straits of Otranto. "U-23" went under assault by the Italian torpedo vessel "Airone" which originally attempted to slam the U-pontoon, and afterward sent a touchy paravane. At the point when the paravane reached the submerged "U-23", it blew flotsam and jetsam into the air, sinking the submarine with all hands. Like every last bit of her sister pontoons, "U-23" had no wartime triumphs.