The Principal and the Pauper 

"The Principal and the Pauper" is the second scene of "The Simpsons"<nowiki>'</nowiki> ninth season. It initially disclosed on the Fox organize in the United States on September 28, 1997. In the scene, Seymour Skinner starts to commend his twentieth commemoration as essential of Springfield Elementary School, when a man arrives asserting that Skinner has expected his character. Primary Skinner concedes that his genuine name is Armin Tamzarian, and that he had thought the genuine Seymour Skinner, a companion from the Army, had kicked the bucket in the Vietnam War. Armin leaves Springfield, however is later convinced to return as chief. 

"The Principal and the Pauper" was composed by Ken Keeler and coordinated by Steven Dean Moore. It visitor featured Martin Sheen as the genuine Seymour Skinner. In spite of the fact that it circulated amid the show's ninth season, it was a remnant from season eight. The scene is a standout amongst the most dubious scenes of "The Simpsons". Numerous fans and commentators responded very adversely to the disclosure that Principal Skinner, a repetitive character since the primary season who had experienced a ton of character improvement, was an impostor. The scene has been condemned by arrangement maker Matt Groening, and by Harry Shearer, who gives the voice of Principal Skinner. In spite of this, Ken Keeler considers the scene the best work he has ever accomplished for TV. 

On the eve of his twentieth commemoration as school chief, Seymour Skinner is tricked by his mom to Springfield Elementary School for an unexpected gathering. The festival goes well until a weird man arrives, professing to be the genuine Seymour Skinner. Chief Skinner concedes that he is an impostor, and that his genuine name is Armin Tamzarian. Armin at that point recounts to the tale of the occasions that drove him to take Seymour Skinner's character. 

Armin was at one time an agitated young fellow from Capital City who enrolled in the Army so as to stay away from a correctional facility sentence for insignificant violations. There, he met and become a close acquaintence with the genuine Sergeant Seymour Skinner, who turned into his guide and helped him discover significance in his vexed life. Seymour revealed to Armin that his fantasy was to turned into a grade school vital after the war. Afterward, Seymour was pronounced missing and assumed dead. Armin took the updates on the clear passing to Seymour's mom, Agnes. After gathering him, be that as it may, Agnes confused him with her child, and Armin couldn't stand to convey the message. He rather permitted Agnes to call him Seymour, and assumed control over Seymour's life. In the interim, the genuine Seymour Skinner went through five years in a POW camp, at that point worked in a Chinese sweatshop for two decades until it was closed somewhere near the United Nations. 

After these disclosures, the general population of Springfield start to doubt Armin. Armin chooses that there is never again wherever for him in Springfield. The genuine Skinner is then offered the opportunity to understand his fantasy and take over as school foremost. He accepts the position, however the genuine Skinner winds up secluded by the townspeople, who acknowledge they lean toward Armin to him. Armin, in any case, has officially left Springfield and gone to Capital City to continue his old persona as a horrible road hooligan. 

Marge heads to Capital City with Edna Krabappel, Agnes and the remainder of the Simpson family. After Agnes orders Armin to return home, Homer influences Mayor Quimby and the various natives to enable Armin to continue his accepted way of life as Principal Skinner. The genuine Skinner is troubled about this and won't surrender his activity and his poise on the grounds that the general population of Springfield lean toward Armin to him. Accordingly, the townspeople exile the genuine Skinner from town by binds him to a seat on a flatcar of a cargo train (actually running him away on a rail). Judge Snyder announces that Armin will again be alluded to as Seymour Skinner, that he will come back to his activity as school primary, and that nobody will until the end of time allude to Skinner or the aftermath from his visit, under punishment of torment. 

"The Principal and the Pauper" was the last scene of "The Simpsons" composed by Ken Keeler, who likewise pitched the first thought for the scene. Numerous fans trust the scene depends on the account of Martin Guerre or the 1993 film "Sommersby". As indicated by movement executive Steve Moore, one of the working titles for the scene was "Skinnersby". In any case, Keeler has said he was enlivened by the Tichborne Case of nineteenth-century England. The scene's authentic title is a reference to the book "The Prince and the Pauper" by Mark Twain. 

Makers Bill Oakley and Josh Weinstein were amped up for the scene since Principal Skinner was one of their preferred characters. The pair had effectively composed the season five scene "Sweet Seymour Skinner's Baadasssss Song", which was an inside and out investigation of the character. Oakley said he and Weinstein "went through a month submerged in the psyche of Seymour Skinner" to set up that scene, and starting now and into the foreseeable future, accepted each open door to "tinker with [Skinner's] identity and his backstory and his homelife". 

Portraying the genuine Seymour Skinner, Keeler commented, "It would have been anything but difficult to make him an extremely awful, frightful, dislikeable person, yet we didn't do that. We made him just not exactly right, not exactly Skinner, and a tad off." Bill Oakley said the thought behind the character was that he "just needed flair". The makers chose Martin Sheen to voice the character since they appreciated his execution in "End of the world Now" and felt his voice would be fitting for a Vietnam veteran. 

Keeler obtained the name Armin Tamzarian from a cases agent who had helped him after an auto crash when he moved to Los Angeles. Notwithstanding, the genuine Tamzarian (presently a California Superior Court Judge) was uninformed his name was being utilized until after the scene publicized. Keeler said he later got a "tersely expressed" letter from Tamzarian, who needed to know why his name showed up in the scene. Keeler dreaded he would confront legitimate inconveniences, yet a short time later, Tamzarian clarified that he was essentially inquisitive and did not expect to frighten anybody. 

"The Principal and the Pauper" completed 41st in the United States in the appraisals for the seven day stretch of September 22–28, 1997, with a Nielsen rating of 9.2. The scene was the second most elevated appraised appear on the Fox arrange that week, following "Ruler of the Hill". The Fox system's appraisals normal for the week was 6.4. 

The disclosure that Principal Skinner was an impostor and the self-referential deus ex machina finishing were contrarily gotten by numerous fans and faultfinders, with many seeing this scene in charge of becoming extremely unbalance. Skinner had been a repetitive character since the primary season and, following quite a while of improvement, his backstory had all of a sudden been changed. Bill Oakley considers "The Principal and the Pauper" the most questionable scene from his residency as official maker. 

In his 2004 book "Planet Simpson", Chris Turner portrays "The Principal and the Pauper" as the "communicate that stamped [the] unexpected dive" from "The Simpsons"<nowiki>'</nowiki> "Brilliant Age", which he says started amidst the show's third season. He calls the scene "[one of] the weakest scenes in "Simpsons" history", and includes, "A conspicuous, progression scrambling plot bit of this sort might've been excusable if the outcome had been as amusing or pointedly ironical as the works of art of the Golden Age, however oh dear it's decidedly not." Turner takes note of that the scene "still games a few virtuoso stiflers", yet says that such minutes are restricted. 

In July 2007, in an article in "The Guardian", Ian Jones contends that the "show ended up idiotic" in 1997, indicating "The Principal and the Pauper" as the bellwether. "Could you repeat that? A noteworthy character in a long-running arrangement gets exposed as a fake? It was modest, inactive narrating", he comments. 

In a February 2006 article in "The Star-Ledger", Alan Sepinwall and Matt Zoller Seitz refer to the scene while attesting that the nature of "The Simpsons" "gets a lot spottier" in season nine. Alan Sepinwall sees in another "Star-Ledger" article, "[The episode] was implausible to the point that even the characters were denying it before the finish of the scene." Jon Hein, who authored the expression "going a little crazy" to allude to negative changes in TV arrangement, writes in "Err on the side of crazy: TV Edition", "We at last detected a balance toward the beginning of the ninth season when Principal Skinner's actual personality was uncovered as Armin Tamzarian." James Greene of "Nerve.com" put the scene fifth on his rundown "Ten Times The Simpsons Jumped the Shark", considering it a "counter-intuitive meta-satire" and contending that it "appeared to deceive the truth of the show itself". 

Different figures related with "The Simpsons" have openly censured the scene. In an April 2001 meeting, Harry Shearer, the voice of Principal Skinner, reviewed that subsequent to perusing the content, he told the authors, "That is "so" off-base. You're taking something that a group of people has fabricated eight years or nine years of interest in and just hurled it in the junk can without any justifiable cause, for a story we've done before with different characters. It's so self-assertive and unwarranted, and it's ill bred to the gathering of people." 

In a December 2006 meeting, Shearer included, "Presently, [the writers] decline to discuss it. They understand it was a loathsome misstep. They never notice it. It resembles they're rebuffing [the audience] for focusing." In the prologue to the ninth season DVD boxset, arrangement maker Matt Groening portrays "The Principal and the Pauper" as "one of [his] least most loved scenes". He likewise called the scene "an error" in a meeting with "Moving Stone". 

Conversely, Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood, the creators of "I Can't Believe It's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide", lauded the scene, calling it "one of the arrangement's unequaled best scenes, predominantly on the grounds that it demonstrates to us a human side, of Principal Skinner, yet of his hectorish Mom also." They include that "Martin Sheen takes the show [...] in a brief however imperative cut of Simpsons history." "Absolute Film"s Nathan Ditum named Martin Sheen's execution in the scene the twentieth best visitor appearance on "The Simpsons". 

Ken Keeler, Bill Oakley, and Josh Weinstein all shield the scene in its DVD discourse. Keeler declares, "I am extremely, exceptionally glad for the activity I did on this scene. This is the best scene of TV I believe I at any point composed." He portrays the scene as a discourse on "individuals who like things simply the manner in which they are", and comments, "It never appears to have jumped out at anybody that this scene is about the general population who loathe it." However, Keeler says that a portion of the exchange was transformed from his unique draft, making this point more subtle. Oakley and Weinstein disclose that they needed to push the limits of the arrangement while filling in as show-sprinters, and encourage watchers to treat "The Principal and the Pauper" as a "try". They gather that the negative gathering was mostly because of the way that it was not quickly clear to watchers this was such a scene (rather than, for instance, "The Simpsons Spin-Off Showcase"). They likewise portray the completion of the scene as an endeavor to reset the coherence and enable fans to consider the scene as non-sanctioned, separated from the bigger arrangement. 

Later scenes of "The Simpsons" contain references to "The Principal and the Pauper". A clasp from the scene was utilized in season eleven's "Behind the Laughter" for instance of the show's undeniably "gimmicky and silly plots". In the season fifteen scene "I, (Annoyed Grunt)- Bot", Lisa addresses Principal Skinner as "Central "Tamzarian"" when Skinner criticizes her for naming her new feline Snowball II, after a feline that had kicked the bucket before in the scene.