John Berry (chairman) 

Morrell John Berry (conceived February 10, 1959) is an American previous government official who was named President of the American Australian Association in 2016. Berry was executive of the United States Office of Personnel Management from 2009 to 2013 and United States Ambassador to Australia from 2013 to 2016. 

Berry was conceived in Montgomery County, Maryland, to guardians who worked for the government. He finished degrees at the University of Maryland, College Park and Syracuse University and worked in nearby government and as an authoritative assistant in state government from 1982 to 1985. From 1985 to 1994, he filled in as authoritative chief for U.S. Delegate Steny Hoyer. He held posts in the U.S. Treasury Department, the Smithsonian Institution, and the U.S. Branch of the Interior until 2000, and functioned as executive of the National Fish and Wildlife Foundation and the National Zoological Park until 2009, when he was selected by President Barack Obama as chief of the United States Office of Personnel Management. Berry got down to business in the wake of being affirmed by the United States Senate in April 2009. In June 2013, President Obama named Berry to supplant Jeff Bleich as U.S. Minister to Australia. He was affirmed by consistent assent of the U.S. Senate in August 2013. 

Berry was conceived February 10, 1959, in Rockville, Montgomery County, Maryland, United States. His dad served in the U.S. Marine Corps, his mom worked for the U.S. Statistics Bureau, and he has a sibling and a sister. Berry moved on from secondary school in 1977 and completed a Bachelor of Arts in government and legislative issues from the University of Maryland, College Park in 1980. In 1981, Berry moved on from the Maxwell School of Citizenship and Public Affairs at Syracuse University with a Master of Public Administration. 

Berry served in the board for the Montgomery County government from 1982 to 1984 and as staff executive of the Maryland Senate Finance Committee from 1984 to 1985. From 1985 to 1994, he was administrative executive for U.S. Agent Steny Hoyer, and partner staff member on the House Appropriations Committee. Berry helped Hoyer on business issues of the national government, and assumed a main job in dealings that prompted the Federal Employees Pay Comparability Act of 1990, which built up the area pay framework. From 1994 to 1995, Berry filled in as Deputy Assistant Secretary and acting Assistant Secretary for Law Enforcement in the U.S. Treasury Department. From 1995 to 1997, Berry filled in as executive of government relations and as senior arrangement counselor at the Smithsonian Institution. 

Berry was delegated Assistant Secretary for Policy, Management and Budget at the U.S. Division of the Interior amid the Clinton organization, serving from 1997 to 2001. At the Interior Department, Berry improved credit association and proceeding with training alternatives, administered the extension of office projects to improve representatives' work-life balance, and held town corridor gatherings with Interior representatives and utilized their recommendations to redesign a cafeteria and wellbeing focus. These progressions were halfway supported through associations with government workers, associations and different organizations to diminish costs for the office. Berry attempted to make a protest method for representatives who experience segregation as a result of their sexual introduction, to extend movement advantages and guiding administrations to residential accomplices of workers, to build up a contact to gay and lesbian specialists, and to take out oppressive arrangements of the National Park Service's law implementation principles. He set up an office supply store for Interior representatives, which he staffed with incapacitated laborers. Berry regulated one of the biggest budgetary increments in the office's history. 

In 2000, Berry progressed toward becoming chief of the National Fish and Wildlife Foundation, where he worked with Interior Inspector General Earl Devaney to accommodate twenty years of monetary records, improve the executives, and preserve untamed life living space through open private associations. Berry was named from October 1, 2005, to fill in as chief of the National Zoo, which had been found to have inadequacies in record keeping and upkeep. Berry made a vital arranging and modernization process for the zoo. This incorporated a twenty-year capital arrangement, verifying $35 million in subsidizing to accommodate fire assurance, and starting redesigns to creature houses. 

The Berry Bastion, an Antarctic mountain, was named in his respect. 

In 2008, Berry was referenced as a conceivable candidate for U.S. Secretary of the Interior, a position acquired by Ken Salazar. President Barack Obama declared his aim to designate Berry as chief of the Office of Personnel Management on March 3, 2009, and did as such on March 4. The designation hearing before the Senate Homeland Security Committee on March 26, 2009, prompted desire for simple affirmation for Berry, notwithstanding resistance from moderate activists dependent on Berry's homosexuality. In the consultation Berry expressed he upheld any compelling worker remuneration framework, yet that the government had the commitment to give representatives with practically identical occupation exhibitions comparative pay and treatment. He vowed to safeguard veterans inclination and supplement it with preparing projects to get ready veterans for government employments, and guaranteed surveys of recommendations to improve the trusted status and contracting forms. Berry underscored the significance for offices to utilize all enrollment apparatuses, refering to migration benefits that could keep offices aggressive with the private division, and expressed he would make a vital arrangement and set execution objectives for the Office of Personnel Management. Berry had expressed help for advantages for same-sex accomplices of government workers and an annulment of the Defense of Marriage Act. 

The Senate affirmed Berry on April 3, 2009, and he was confirmed April 13 as the primary office executive in the Obama organization with all ranking staff set up. The formal swearing in on April 23 was gone to by First Lady Michelle Obama. At the time, Berry was, as indicated by the Human Rights Campaign, the most noteworthy positioning transparently gay authority to serve in the official branch in any U.S. organization. 

In June 2013, President Obama assigned Berry to be the US envoy to Australia, the principal transparently gay U.S. minister to a G-20 country. On August 1, 2013, the United States Senate affirmed Berry by consistent assent. Australian media inclusion of Berry's arrangement was overwhelmingly positive with a video he presented on the US Embassy site being depicted as the "friendliest presentation video in political history" while Berry himself was portrayed as "unobtrusive", with an "amazing record". Government News Radio in the US announced that, "in excess of 200 individuals had posted reactions" to the video, "the greater part of which were warm and agreeable". 

Before being selected as minister to Australia Berry lived in Washington, D.C. Berry is straightforwardly gay. On August 10, 2013, he wedded Curtis Yee, his accomplice for a long time, at St Margaret's Episcopal Church in Washington.