By means of Negativa (The X-Files) 

"By means of Negativa" is the seventh scene of the eighth season and the 168th scene generally speaking of the sci-fi TV arrangement "The X-Files". The scene initially disclosed in the United States and Canada on December 17, 2000 on Fox and in this way publicized in the United Kingdom. It was composed by official maker Frank Spotnitz and coordinated by Tony Wharmby. It is a Monster-of-the-Week scene, detached to the arrangement's more extensive folklore. The scene earned a Nielsen family unit rating of 7.3 and was seen by 12.37 million watchers. It was commonly generally welcomed by TV pundits, with numerous emphatically remarking on the "ghostly" climate of the fantasy successions; one faultfinder alluded to it as a "wonderful "X-Files" scene." 

The arrangement focuses on FBI specialists Dana Scully (Gillian Anderson) and her new accomplice John Doggett (Robert Patrick)—following the outsider kidnapping of her previous accomplice, Fox Mulder (David Duchovny)—who deal with cases connected to the paranormal, called X-Files. In this scene, Scully gets some much needed rest to manage the beginning periods of her pregnancy, and Doggett and Walter Skinner endeavor to deflect the strange homicide binge of a religious clique pioneer who murders his unfortunate casualties in their rest. In the long run, the faction chief's quintessence of malice has Doggett, who is asked to kill Scully while he rests. 

Spotnitz was enlivened to compose the scene subsequent to being captivated by the psychological picture of a container of toothpaste that, when opened, overflowed blood. Since Gillian Anderson was not accessible for the majority of recording, the repetitive characters of Walter Skinner and The Lone Gunmen were acquired. The scene's title, "Through Negativa"—which signifies "Negative Way" in Latin—is a religious philosophy that endeavors to depict God by describing what God isn't. 

In Pittsburgh, two FBI specialists, Angus Stedman (Lawrence LeJohn) and James Leeds (Kevin McClatchy), are watching a house when Leeds nods off. When he stirs, he finds that the front entryway of the house is open. The two specialists examine and unearth a room loaded up with dead bodies. Abruptly, a man employing a hatchet and having a third eye murders the two operators with a hit to the head. 

The next day, Dana Scully (Gillian Anderson) calls John Doggett (Robert Patrick) to illuminate him about the case and says she won't go along with him, because of individual issues. Doggett visits the wrongdoing scene, where he gets together with his manager, Walter Skinner (Mitch Pileggi). Skinner enlightens him regarding the religion and how the unfortunate casualties kicked the bucket. Leeds' body is found in his vehicle, yet his accomplice, Stedman, is absent, alongside clique pioneer Anthony Tipet (Keith Szarabajka): the man with the third eye. The FBI later discovers Stedman at his bolted up condominium with a lethal hit to the head. In the interim, Tipet is looking for a drug specialist and staggers into a telephone stall to call an anonymous individual. At the point when a tramp approaches him for change, Tipet assaults the tramp, catching him in the asphalt and hacking out his temple. 

At the FBI, Skinner briefs Alvin Kersh (James Pickens, Jr.), and different specialists about the case. He reveals to them that Tipet utilized a psychedelic drug "Tabernanthe iboga" to convey himself closer to God utilizing a mix of Christian and Eastern religious practices called the by means of negativa, which means the "negative way" in Latin. Following Tipet's prior call drives Doggett and Skinner to Andre Bormanis (Grant Heslov), a street pharmacist. Bormanis is captured, and put in a cell at the neighborhood police division. At the correctional facility, Doggett has a dream of him grasping Scully's disjoined head. In the wake of waking, Doggett understands his vision was a terrible dream. In the interim, in his cell, Bormanis has nodded off, and is longing for being assaulted by rodents. Doggett and different officers discover Bormanis' chewed up body. 

Doggett comes back to the X-Files office, where, incredibly, he meets The Lone Gunmen. They inform him regarding the historical backdrop of the third eye. While reaching a similar resolution, they are persuaded that Tipet is anticipating himself into individuals' fantasies and executing them there. Coming back to the stockroom where they discovered Bormanis, Skinner and Doggett meet Tipet, who is attempting to end his very own life by pushing his head through a table saw. They surge him to the medical clinic, where Doggett unsuspecting Scully's name on the register. With Tipet in a trance like state, Kersh chooses to pull the attachment working on it, saying they've discovered the principle suspect. Be that as it may, Doggett and Skinner are not fulfilled, saying there are no clarifications for the different homicides and occasions encompassing the case. 

The following day, Doggett awakens and finds that he presently has a third eye amidst his temple. All of a sudden, it disappears. At the FBI building, he converses with Skinner, seeking after consolation. He communicates his dread that, regardless of Tipet being in a state of unconsciousness, Tipet may even now have the capacity to go into his fantasies. Skinner, be that as it may, expels his worries and sends him home. While leaving, Doggett has a fantasy of Tipet, requesting him to execute Scully. All of a sudden, Doggett winds up before Scully. Instead of murder his accomplice, he turns the hatchet upon himself. Doggett is quickly stirred from his dim dream and winds up in his room, with Scully remaining over his bed. He starts to express gratitude toward her for sparing his life, however she illuminates him that Tipet passed on because of his trance state. 

Plain Spotnitz was roused to express "Through Negativa" after a boating trip in which a "companion of a companion" referenced an aggravating visual: a container of toothpaste that, when opened, overflowed human blood. The thought motivated Spotnitz to work it into a scene, however because of its weirdness, he was unfit to think about any certifiable situations in which this would occurs. Therefore, he started to investigate "dreams and bad dreams." He in the long run concocted the possibility of a clique attempting to achieve a higher plane of presence, yet rather faltering into a "lower place, a darker plane." Spotnitz later clarified: "Imagine a scenario where the higher plane is a darker plane, consider the possibility that we believe we're coming to up however we're coming to down." The scene's title, "By means of Negativa," signifies "Negative Way" in Latin. This kind of religious philosophy, all the more usually alluded to as apophatic religious philosophy, endeavors to depict God by developing what God isn't. 

Gillian Anderson's character Dana Scully would not be accessible, since the composition staff had chosen before the scene was composed that she would invest the greater part of her energy in the clinic. Spotnitz considered this to be a chance to additionally advance Doggett's character. So as to fill Anderson's void, two repeating gatherings of characters were gotten: Walter Skinner and The Lone Gunmen. Spotnitz noticed that, "we were anxious to get Skinner out from behind the work area, and we were continually searching for chances to get him out of that office and get him into the field." Mitch Pileggi, who depicted Walter Skinner, was satisfied with the last item. He later complimented crafted by Robert Patrick, who played Doggett, saying, "It was a major gap when Mulder was gone, yet I felt that Robert came in and completed a brilliant activity. He conveyed a great vitality to the set, and it was a ton of fun becoming acquainted with and work with him." Spotnitz was anxious to utilize The Lone Gunmen in the scene, since this the scene would stamp their first scene together with Doggett. Robert Patrick called the scene his "most loved scene," in light of the fact that the essayists made a "defenseless" minute for his character. 

The character of Andre Bormanis was named after one of Spotnitz's beloved companions, who proceeded to wind up one of the science specialists for both "" and "". In setting up the character's passing scene, Tony Wharmby, the scene's chief, spent an entire day shooting supplements of rodents. Altogether, the film team utilized 500 rodents. At first, Wharmby had an issue getting a shot where the rodents gather amidst a room. So as to fix this, creature coaches constantly discharged more rodents until the center piece of the room was at last secured. The team later spent numerous hours "painting out rodent droppings in that shot." 

"By means of Negativa" debuted on December 17, 2000 on American TV on Fox. The scene earned a Nielsen family evaluating of 7.3, implying that it was seen by 7.3% of the country's assessed families. The scene was viewed by 7.36 million families and 12.37 million watchers. Fox advanced the scene with the slogan "They state on the off chance that you kick the bucket in a fantasy ... you will never wake up." 

"Through Negativa" got for the most part positive surveys from pundits. Michael Roffman of "Time" named it the "best post-Mulder" scene, expressing that "scenes like this demonstrated there were simply enough excites to get by without Spooky". Zack Handlen of "The A.V. Club" granted the scene an "A–" and noticed that the scene had a "certain power that took me as a rule zoned out". Despite the fact that advised that "Through Negativa" isn't "some sort of lost exemplary" and that the story itself was not "too great", he applauded the air of the scene, portraying it as "overwhelming, fate loaded, and habitually peculiar". Truth be told, he contended that it to a great extent "compensates for any inadequacies in the content". Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson, in their book "Needing to Believe: A Critical Guide to The X-Files, Millennium and The Lone Gunmen", appraised the scene five stars out of five and called it "a standout amongst the best independent "X-Files" in years." 

George Avaros and Michael Liedtke from the "Contra Costa Times" were by and large positive towards the scene, saying it had every one of the highlights which made a "great "X-Files" scene". They further expressed that it had a "frightful, practically dreamlike quality sprinkled with concise exchange, lighthearted element and mysterious bits of knowledge into key characters that left us pondering what kind of inconvenience may be around the curve". Avaros and Liedtke likewise responded emphatically to the various references to Fox Mulder. At long last, the scene was contrasted with crafted by David Lynch in his arrangement, "Twin Peaks". Paula Vitaris from "Cinefantastique" gave the scene a reasonably positive survey and granted it more than two stars out of four. She noticed that, "'Via Negativa' is short on plot however compensates for it by being long on air and state of mind, conjuring up various appalling, creepy pictures".