Fifteen (tune) 

"Fifteen" is a nation pop melody performed by American vocalist lyricist Taylor Swift. Quick self-wrote the tune and co-created it alongside Nathan Chapman. "Fifteen" was discharged on August 30, 2009 by Big Machine Records, as the fourth single from Swift's second studio collection, "Dauntless" (2008). The tune was propelled by Swift's first year of secondary school at Hendersonville High School, where she initially experienced disaster, alongside her closest companion Abigail Anderson. In the wake of composing it, Swift approached Anderson for approval to record the melody (because of individual references in the tune); Anderson asserted and it was eventually included on "Daring". "Fifteen" is a song, which has Swift thinking back on occasions that struck her and her closest companion at 15 years old and forewarning young people to not begin to look all starry eyed at effectively. 

"Fifteen" crested at number 23 on the "Announcement" Hot 100 and sold over 1.5 million advanced downloads in the United States. The music video for "Fifteen" was coordinated by Roman White. It was shot utilizing a green screen and is vigorously highlighted with enhancements. The video highlights Swift strolling through a greenery enclosure, where she remembers numerous recollections with Anderson. It got a designation for the Best Female Video classification at the 2010 MTV Video Music Awards, however lost to Lady Gaga's "Awful Romance". "Fifteen" was advanced with live exhibitions, including numerous that were a piece of Swift's first and second featuring visits, the Fearless Tour (2009–10) and the Speak Now World Tour (2011–12). Quick joined forces with gadgets retailer Best Buy for @15, a program that enabled teenagers to help choose how assets would be dispersed among different philanthropies. 

Quick started composition "Fifteen" with the verse "And Abigail gave all that she had to a kid/Who altered his opinion/We both cried", which inevitably turned into the tune's scaffold, and kept composing everything else in a retrogressive way. The melody was expounded on Swift's first year of secondary school at Hendersonville High School, where she met her closest companion Abigail Anderson. "I simply chosen I truly needed to recount to that tale about our first year of secondary school since I felt in my first year, I grew up more than any year in my life up until now", Swift expressed. The occasions it concentrated on were the means by which both Swift and Anderson began to look all starry eyed at out of the blue, yet both endured of heartbreaks. Beside thinking back on the occasions she and Anderson experienced, Swift composed preventative verses, planned to target young ladies entering or as of now in their first year of secondary school. She depicted it as consolidating things she wished somebody would have advised her in a tune when she was more youthful. "The thing about secondary school, you know nothing. You know nothing, however you think you know everything", Swift said. 

After the fulfillment of forming "Fifteen", Swift turned out to be extremely anxious to demonstrate Anderson the tune, for she didn't have the foggiest idea how her companion would react. "It was an extremely close to home melody, particularly from her edge of it." However, when Swift played out the tune for Anderson and asked whether she was alright with the tune, Anderson affirmed: "She stated, 'Does it trouble you that your name is in a tune that is so close to home?' And it truly doesn't in light of the manner in which Taylor and I feel about it. In the event that one young lady can sort of gain from it or associate with a tune that way, it's absolutely justified, despite all the trouble." With Anderson's assent, Swift recorded "Fifteen" with maker Nathan Chapman, who created everything except one track on Swift's 2006 eponymous introduction collection, "Taylor Swift". Recording the exceptionally close to home track made Swift cry. Quick ascribed the occasion to the way that she is well on the way to cry over when her friends and family experience torment, as she observes it, as opposed to her own encounters. She went to state "Fifteen" generally gets her without fail. 

"Fifteen" is a nation pop melody with a length of four minutes and 55 seconds. It is set in like manner time and has a moderate rhythm of 96 beats for every moment. The track is ordered as a ditty. It is written in the key of G major and Swift's vocals traverses a little more than two octaves, from G to C. It pursues the harmony movement Gsus–Csus–Em–Csus. It finishes up with an outro that comprises of Swift singing "la" and rethinking the melody's opening lines. 

The verses of "Fifteen" have Swift describing about different occasions. In the primary section, Swift subtleties first entering secondary school with goals of only avoiding her friends' way. The second stanza bears Swift gathering Anderson and tattling about the school's ruler honey bees with her. Progressively, Swift depicts first dates and experiencing passionate feelings for out of the blue. In any case, Swift and Anderson become devastated, uncovering that Anderson "gave all that she had" to somebody who later altered his opinion. The melody's abstains have Swift forewarning young ladies to not begin to look all starry eyed at effectively and recognizing that she went to the acknowledgment of having the capacity to achieve more than dating a football crew part. 

Jody Rosen of "Moving Stone" trusted "Fifteen" was commendable in that "Quick is a songwriting intellectual with a natural present for refrain chorale connect design". Rosen contrasted her songwriting in the track with that of makers Dr. Luke and Max Martin, who he alluded to as "Swedish pop divine beings". He proceeded, "Her music blends a practically unoriginal demonstrable skill — it's so thoroughly made it sounds like it has been logically designed in a hit production line — with admissions that are squirmingly personal and genuine." Jonathon Keefe of "Inclination Magazine" considered the scaffold one of the more pleasant snapshots of "Dauntless", yet was unmoved with Swift's singing, especially in the outro. Stephen Thomas Erlewine of Allmusic discovered "Fifteen", in which Swift depicted the job of an elder sibling rather than a major star, to be a standout amongst the best and the most close to home tune on "Intrepid". Ken Tucker of "Board" magazine trusted "Fifteen" could request with young people searching for expectation and grown-up ladies thinking back the past. Leah Greenbelt of "Stimulation Weekly" expressed, "When she sings about sexuality, she seems like a genuine teenager, not some fabricated lady Lolita". 

Jon Caramanica of "The New York Times" said "Fifteen" was a standout amongst Swift's best-composed melodies. James Reed of "The Boston Globe" trusted "Fifteen" was one of "Fearless"s most intriguing tunes and expressed he could envision the verses of the tune wrote in a journal that chronicled Swift's first year in secondary school. Sean Dooley of About.com named it the best track on "Bold" and said it displayed Swift's development as a lyricist. Josh Love of "The Village Voice" considered the melody a "champion" on the collection and discovered it an invigorating inconsistency to run of the mill, optimistic down home tunes. Before its single discharge, Kate Kiefer of "Glue" magazine recommended for the melody be discharged as a solitary from "Daring", including that she adored it. Alexis Petridis of "The Guardian" considered the track a fabulously decent melody that widened "her potential market from adolescent young ladies to any individual who used to be a high school young lady". Petridis proceeded, "You hail her expertise, while feeling marginally agitated by the prospect of an adolescent pontificating without end like Yoda." Aidan Vaziri of "San Francisco Chronicle" positioned it twelfth on his best 12 singles of 2009 rundown, remarking, "Damn it if this tune isn't excessively sweet, excessively powerless and just too genuine to even consider ignoring." 

Following the arrival of "Bold", on the week finishing November 29, 2008, "Fifteen" appeared at number seventy-nine on the "Board" Hot 100 Its appearance, alongside six different melodies, on the outline tied Swift with Hannah Montana (Miley Cyrus) for the female demonstration to have the most tunes diagramming on the "Announcement" Hot 100 around the same time, a record later outperformed by Swift herself when she graphed eleven tunes without a moment's delay in 2010. It returned at number ninety-four on the week finishing October 3, 2009, after its single discharge. On the week finishing December 19, 2009, "Fifteen" achieved its crest at number twenty-three on the "Board" Hot 100, and, on the week finishing February 6, 2010, spent its last week at number forty, following twenty-one weeks on the graph. The melody is one of thirteen tunes from "Bold" graphed inside the main forty of the "Bulletin" Hot 100, breaking the record for the most top forty passages from a solitary collection. The single was affirmed twofold platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America. As of November 2017, "Fifteen" has sold over 1.5 million duplicates in the United States. 

"Fifteen" appeared at number forty-one on Hot Country Songs. It seized number thirty-one on its second week and on the week-finishing November 7, 2009, it entered the main ten at number ten. A month and a half later, it achieved its crest at number seven on the week-finishing December 12, 2009. The single turned into her second single that did not achieve the main three of Hot Country Songs since her presentation single "Tim McGraw". "Fifteen" likewise top at number ten on Pop Songs, number twelve on Adult Contemporary, and at number fourteen at Adult Pop Songs. 

On the week finishing January 23, 2010, the tune topped at number nineteen in Canada. It was ensured gold by Music Canada for offers of 40,000 computerized downloads. "Fifteen" topped at number forty-eight in Australia on the week finishing December 13, 2009. 

The music video for "Fifteen" was coordinated by Roman White, who recently coordinated Swift's music video "You Belong with Me". White started with the aim of making a video not quite the same as others Swift did before. To do as such, he trusted he expected to set the video outside of secondary school. White clarified, "Well, I think I truly needed this video to sort of be a development for Taylor [...] I really said to her, 'I don't figure we should shoot in a secondary school.' And I don't think she needed to either." White conceptualized the video's setting by considering the strict importance of the tune and changing into something new. He conceptualized the setting to be another existence where Swift could return to her recollections, as they show around her. "How about we take the strict importance of this melody and watch it advance before us ... nearly as a memory in your mind. What's more, make this world, some place you stroll in on this ruined desert and you begin to sing pretty much all these extraordinary recollections you have... of all that you cherish blossoming around you, thus we truly developed this patio nursery around her", White said. The world moved starting with one circumstance then onto the next. White chose to attach dreamlike components to make a combination of a greenery enclosure and the core of the recollections. He interweaved Swift's feelings with the development of the greenery enclosure. The greenhouse developed when Swift felt glad, however at seeing agony and negative feelings, mists show up and the patio nursery passes on, which additionally symbolized Swift's closest companion Abigail Anderson's broken heart. 

Quick's companion, Anderson, depicted herself in the video. The adoration interests of both Swift and Anderson were thrown by Swift after she got pictures of them through email. The video was recorded in two days. The primary day comprised of on-screen characters, including Swift and Anderson, recording before a green screen. On the set, White gave Swift cartoon illustrations portraying the music video, so as to control herself. Quick was awed by Anderson's acting aptitudes, thinking about her absence of experience, and called it "productive". On the second day, scenes at a secondary school were recorded; counterfeit downpour was made. A short time later, White and a group of enhanced visualization specialists made the setting. "On the off chance that you observe only the disconnected alter of this video, it's simply green. It's simply Taylor strolling around a mammoth green screen. What's more, to imagine that each and every thing in that video was made is stunning, 'cause many individuals buckled down on it", White said. The enhanced visualizations group were grinding away for the video for quite a while, some of the time remaining medium-term in the workplace to deliver the video. The heading was to influence the video to appear "mystical". A portion of the props utilized when shooting were reproduced utilizing advanced movement, for example, the entryway and the work areas. Since additional items were taped independently, White was fastidious to locate the correct shots to make the scene increasingly firm. White trusted the completed item had a feeling of honesty. 

The video starts with Swift, shoeless and clad in a white sundress, moving toward a tall, angled entryway which emerges amidst a desolate scene. Quick takes a gander at a photo of herself and her companion tucked into the curve and, at that point, goes through the entryways. On the opposite side of the curve, vivified blooms and vines develop over the scenes. Individuals and articles from a secondary school blur all through view. Quick strolls through the recollections and starts to play an acoustic guitar underneath a tree. Subsequently, Anderson shows up, sitting at a work area before a writing slate in the field of blooms. Quick takes a seat adjacent to her and the two start to murmur and giggle to one another. In the following scene, Swift plays a namesake Taylor brand guitar while Anderson goes on her first date; she kisses her date, however pushes him away when he attempts to go further. Her adoration intrigue and all environment break down to demonstrate Anderson sitting alone on a stone seat. Quick methodologies her and embraces her firmly as the field around them turns dim and stormy. The video at that point shifts back and forth between Swift singing in the downpour and embracing her companion. After the scene crumbles, the video changes to the real world, where Swift, wearing a dark channel coat, remains in the downpour, over the road from a secondary school. Quick at that point sees an understudy at the passage; the two look and the video closes. Until this point in time, the video has more than 140 million perspectives on YouTube. 

The music video debuted on October 9, 2009 on CMT. Dwindle Gicas of E! thought the video was "sweet" and stated, "And keeping in mind that the visuals here—Taylor strolling all through different vivified scenes—are absolutely decent to take a gander at, they all things considered take a secondary lounge to the nation star's adorableness." Leah Greenblatt of "Excitement Weekly" reviewed the video a B. Greenblatt trusted the video was respectful and painterly, however condemned it by saying "Fifteen's" most dominant verses were beaten by the fantastic structure. Jocelyn Vena of MTV expressed, "Taylor Swift is 'Fifteen' once more in the new music video for her tune of a similar name." At the 2010 MTV Video Music Awards, the video was designated for the MTV Video Music Award for Best Female Video, however lost to Lady Gaga's video for "Terrible Romance" (2009).