Munir Hussain (pundit) 

Munir Hussain (29 November 1929 – 29 July 2013) was a cricket pundit, overseer, and writer from Pakistan who additionally played a five star cricket coordinate for Kalat in the 1969–70 season. He was the first to acquaint Urdu analysis with cricket, and was the originator of the principal Urdu cricket magazine, "Akhbar-e-Watan". Amid the 1970s, Hussain commentated on the diversion for Pakistan Television (PTV) and Radio Pakistan, and composed week by week segments on cricket for the "Every day Jang" for a long time. He got numerous honors for his work for cricket. ESPNcricinfo essayist Saad Shafqat depicted him as "a spearheading reporter, momentous distributer, Karachi City Cricket Association (KCCA) mandarin, and astute senior nearness in the country's cricket circles". He additionally filled in as the leader of the KCCA. 

Hussain was a decent seamer with pace who played a great deal of club cricket. He showed up, amid the 1969–70 Quaid-I-Azam Trophy for Kalat against Quetta. Captaining his group, he scored 12 keeps running in the match. As a right-arm medium-quick bowler, Hussain took 2 wickets for 64 runs. Previous Pakistan chief Imran Khan adulated his "touch and course" – once he bowled to Khan in the work on amid the 1980s. 

The late 1960s, Radio Pakistan and PTV were communicating discourse just in English, which was not plainly reasonable to most Pakistani cricket fans. Hussain was the first to advanced having Urdu analysis. He began commentating in Urdu amid the 1969 Jang Gold Cup last, a match between National Sports and Clifton Gymkhana played at the Youth Center, Nazimabad; in the match 13 Pakistani Test cricketers were playing. Hussain began commentating in Urdu discourse which recognized him from his peers. His recognized Urdu analysis vocation crossed quite a few years, from the 1970s to the 2000s. 

For cricket inclusion between the 1975 and 2003 World Cups, he voyaged pretty much every Test cricket country. 

Hussain remained the leader of the KCCA for two terms, and a part for a long time. He additionally headed Pakistan Cricket Commentators Club (PCCC) in 2013. He was one of the organizers of Jang Cricket Club. Cricket observer, Chishty Mujahid, paid tributes his administrations and said that he was a multifaceted identity as a cricket overseer, reporter, writer, commentator, investigator, coordinator and significantly more. 

Hussain's first energy was news-casting; his most punctual fruitful magazine was "Filmasia", devoted to the Indian and Pakistani film ventures. "Akhbar-e-Watan", a month to month Urdu cricket magazine, was altered by him from 1977 to 2010. Hussain constantly composed week by week cricket segments for the "Day by day Jang", the Pakistan's biggest and most established course paper, for very nearly four decades. 

Hussain got the Best Urdu Commentator of the Decade Award for 1985–95. The Pakistan Broadcasting Corporation (PBC) displayed him the Lifetime Achievement Award. On the tenth commemoration of the 1992 Cricket World Cup, won by Pakistan, he was additionally one of the beneficiaries of the PCB's World Cup Legends Award. 

Hussain was conceived in November 1929 in Amritsar, Punjab, British Raj (presently India). At an extremely youthful age, he moved to Karol Bagh – an area of Delhi – where he spent the early long stretches of his life. He moved from Amritsar to Pakistan in 1947. Hussain was hitched and had four youngsters, two girls and two children. Iqbal Munir, one of his children, is a cricket photojournalist. 

Hussain experienced ulcers and experienced blood transfusion multiple times. Notwithstanding experiencing knee joint inflammation, that constrained his portability, his wellbeing was great. Before his demise on 29 July 2013, Hussain watched the second Twenty20 International played among Pakistan and the West Indies. He passed on at 83 years old from a heart assault in Karachi. His memorial service was offered at Abu Bakar Siddiq mosque, DHA Phase-II, and he was covered at Gizri burial ground soon thereafter. Hussain's granddaughter, Khizra, said at his demise the "he was loved to the point that at the burial service we weren't allowed to cry since individuals continued revealing to us anecdotes about him and his liberality." 

Previous commanders of the Pakistan cricket group Javed Miandad, Wasim Bari, Rashid Latif, cricket pundit Chishti Mujahid, previous KCCA president Sirajul Islam Bukhari, and numerous other ex-Test cricketers went to his memorial service. Miandad, offering his sympathies, said that "Hussain had his very own fan following and served the amusement with unique excellence." The between time administrator of the Pakistan Cricket Board, Najam Sethi, said that "he was an educated, agreeable and amicable identity; his passing will be generally grieved by the writer and communicate network just as the cricketing clique the nation over".