Bill Brown with the Australian cricket group in England in 1948 

Bill Brown was an individual from Donald Bradman's popular Australian cricket group, which visited England in 1948. Bradman's men experienced their 34 matches without annihilation; this remarkable accomplishment by a Test side visiting England earned them the sobriquet "The Invincibles". 

An accomplished right-gave opening batsman, Brown was on his third visit to England, having first visited in 1934 preceding World War II. Be that as it may, Brown's greatest years were lost to the war and by 1948 Sid Barnes and Arthur Morris had supplanted him in the pecking request to turn into Australia's first-decision opening pair. Darker was chosen as a save opener; this choice produced contention among pundits who trusted he was past his best. 

Bradman turned the three openers in the visit matches, however Morris and Barnes were favored in the Tests. Bradman obliged Brown in his first-decision group by playing him out of position in the center request in the Tests. In any case, Brown seemed awkward in the new job, and was dropped in the wake of making 73 keeps running at a batting normal of 24.33 in the initial two Tests. 

Notwithstanding his battles in the Test field, Brown had achievement in the visit coordinates as an opener. He scored 1,448 keeps running at 57.92 in all top of the line matches, positioning fourth in both the totals and midpoints. He scored eight centuries, second just to Bradman, including 200 against Cambridge University. Be that as it may, Brown picked up analysis for his moderate batting. Following his oversight from the Test group, Brown batted in an exceptionally watchful way to build the unwavering quality and volume of his scoring. An extremely incidental off turn bowler, Brown took his profession top of the line best of 4/16 in his solitary spell with the ball, against the South of England. 

Dark colored had been a customary individual from the Australian Test group since his presentation in 1934, and following World War II, he captained Australia in the debut Test against New Zealand. Be that as it may, he was sidelined by damage in 1946–47 and Sid Barnes and Arthur Morris opened in the Tests, averaging 73.83 and 71.85 individually. Dark colored continued his Test vocation in the accompanying season, supplanting Barnes, yet he was dropped subsequent to scoring 29 keeps running in two Tests. Barnes then came in and made 139 keeps running in the following two Tests, incorporating a 112 in the Fourth Test. Morris was then refreshed for the Fifth Test to enable Brown another opportunity to demonstrate his capacity and put forth a defense for proceeded with national determination, and he made 99. In the Tests against India amid the season, Barnes, Morris and Brown had shared the opening obligations; their batting midpoints were 43.00, 52.25 and 42.66 separately. Regardless, Brown had done what's necessary to visit England with "The Invincibles" in 1948, his third excursion there, despite the fact that Barnes and Morris were the principal decision opening blend. 

Australia generally handled its first-decision group in the visit opener, which was usually against Worcestershire. Dark colored picked up determination, despite the fact that Bradman batted him out of position in the center request while Barnes and Morris opened. Dark colored came in 6/335 and scored 25 at a regularly serene pace, collecting his keeps running at a lower strike rate than the other perceived batsmen. He was out with the score at 6/402 as Australia proceeded to proclaim at 8/462 and win by an innings. 

In the following match against Leicestershire, Bradman rested Morris, so Brown opened with Barnes. Dark colored scored 26 out of an opening stand of 46, as Australia amassed 448 and won by an innings. 

The Australians continued to play Yorkshire at Bradford, on a sodden pitch appropriate for slower bowling. In the principal innings, Brown took three gets from the bowling of Keith Miller—who had depended on bowling off spin—as Yorkshire were bowled out for 71 in troublesome batting conditions. Opening with Morris while Barnes was refreshed, Brown made 13 as the match remained finely adjusted after Australia was bowled for 101. Darker took another catch from Miller in the second innings as the hosts were bowled out for 89. Pursuing 60 for triumph, Brown tumbled to Frank Smailes for two as the Australian top request fallen to 6/31—effectively seven wickets down with the harmed Sam Loxton unfit to bat—before scratching home by four wickets. 

Darker was refreshed for the following match against Surrey, which Australia won by an innings. After the initial four matches, five Australians hade made hundreds of years, and another had passed fifty. Darker had scored just 66 keeps running with a most astounding score of 26, while Morris and Barnes, the officeholder openers, had scored 223 and 298 keeps running with a century and fifty each. 

Darker was reviewed for the match against Cambridge University, opening with Morris while Barnes rested. Subsequent to putting on 64 for the opening wicket with Morris, Brown included 176 for the second wicket with Ron Hamence. He included a further 140 for the fourth wicket with Lindsay Hassett, who was captaining the group while Bradman rested himself. Darker top-scored with 200 and Hassett proclaimed when his twofold centurion was out with the score at 4/414. Australia proceeded to win by an innings. In the accompanying match against Essex, Brown opened with Barnes while Morris was refreshed. The pair put on 145 out of 97 minutes—the most elevated opening stand by the Australians on the visit to that point—before Barnes was out hit wicket. Meanwhile, Brown had achieved 50 out of an hour and a half. Bradman came in and he and Brown quickened to put on a second-wicket association of 219 of every hour and a half, before the last was out for 153 from three hours of batting with the score at 2/364. Darker had scored his last 100 keeps running in under an hour and a half. Australia proceeded to score 721 keeps running on the primary day, the most elevated number of runs amassed in one day of top notch cricket, before finishing triumph by an innings and 451 runs, their biggest winning edge for the visit. Opening with Morris while Barnes was refreshed, Brown finished his third century in the same number of innings with 108 against Oxford University, subsequent to putting on an opening stand of 139. This implied he had scored 461 keeps running in eight days of cricket, and put him on the batting totals, in front of Bradman. Australia proceeded to finish their fourth progressive innings triumph. 

The following match was against the Marylebone Cricket Club (MCC) at Lord's. The MCC handled seven players who might speak to England in the Tests, and were essentially a full quality Test group, while Australia handled their first-decision group. Bradman introduced Barnes and Morris as his favored opening pair, while Brown batted out of position at No. 6. Notwithstanding one change in the bowling office, a similar group arranged in the First Test, with the main six batsmen in similar positions. It was an opportunity for players from the two sides to pick up a mental favorable position, yet Brown neglected to underwrite. He went to the wrinkle with the score at 4/280 to join Keith Miller and scored 26 of every a remain of 63 preceding being expelled as Australia amassed 552 and won by an innings. This was trailed by Australia's first non-triumph of the visit, against Lancashire, a draw for which Brown was refreshed. 

Dark colored returned for the accompanying match, which was against Nottinghamshire, and added 122 to enroll his fourth century in under three weeks. Australia made 400 yet the hosts held tight for an attract the second innings. In the following match against Hampshire, Brown opened with Barnes and made a duck as Australia were rejected for 117 on a moist contribute answer to the house side's 195. It was the first run through the voyagers had surrendered a first innings amid the mid year. Hampshire were in this manner bowled out in their second innings for 103 to leave Australia an objective of 182. This time Barnes fell for a duck, and Brown tied down Australia to an eight-wicket win with an unbeaten 81 following a century second-wicket association with Ian Johnson. The last match before the First Test was against Sussex. Opening with Morris, Brown played second fiddle, aggregating 44 as the pair put on an opening stand of 153. Morris went on to 184 and Australia proclaimed at 5/549 preceding finishing another innings triumph. 

As yet, Brown—who was on his third voyage through England—had scored 800 keeps running on visit at a normal of 72.72, with a twofold century, three different hundreds of years and 81 not out, interestingly, center request batsman Neil Harvey battled in the underlying phases of his first voyage through England. Harvey neglected to pass 25 in his initial six innings, and despite the fact that he had scored an unbeaten 100 against Sussex, he had totalled just 296 keeps running at 42.29. Accordingly, Brown picked up choice in the First Test at Trent Bridge, batting out of position in the center request while Barnes and Morris opened, though Harvey was dropped regardless of making a century in Australia's latest Test against India. 

Britain batted first and made 165, with Brown unmistakable in the field. From the get-go the principal day of play, Brown got England opener Cyril Washbrook on the keep running at the fine leg limit after the batsman had endeavored to snare a Ray Lindwall bouncer, leaving England at 2/15 following 41 minutes of play. He later made a progression of one-gave stops in the field, keeping the weight on the batsmen. Darker took his second catch of the innings to expel Alec Bedser, who had highlighted in a rearguard fightback to help take England to 165 after they had tumbled to 8/74. 

On the second day, Barnes and Bradman took the score to 1/121 preceding Barnes and Miller were rejected moving along without any more expansion to the score. At the same time, Australia had been scoring gradually, as they would for the duration of the day. Darker came in at No. 5 to join Bradman, yet he had played the vast majority of his vocation as an opening batsman and he looked awkward in the center request, however Bradman got him in front of Hassett as the new ball was expected and Brown was accustomed to beginning his innings against pace bowlers and another ball. English chief Norman Yardley expelled Jim Laker from the assault and took the second new ball. Bradman struck his first limit in more than 80 minutes and the run rate grabbed to some degree, inciting England to return to slower bowling. Australia passed England's aggregate before Yardley expedited himself to bowl and caught Brown—who was endeavoring to push the ball to mid-on—leg before wicket (lbw) with an off shaper in his first finished. This finished a 64-run remain in 58 minutes and left Australia at 4/185. Following the takeoff of Brown, the scoring moderated as Bradman changed the group procedure to one of endeavoring to bat just once. Australia inevitably achieved 509, and after England arranged 441 in their second innings, Brown was not required as Australia made the 98 runs required triumph for the loss of just two wickets. 

Between Tests, Brown was refreshed for the match against Northamptonshire, which Australia won by an innings. He returned for the second installation against Yorkshire. Opening with Barnes, Brown made 19 as Australia took a 43-run first innings lead. In the second innings, Brown top-scored with 113. He joined with Bradman to include 154 keeps running for the second wicket as the match dwindled into a draw. In a patient and controlled showcase, Brown took four hours to make his century. Following his disputable determination for the visit, Brown was endeavoring to legitimize his situation in the group by aggregating an extensive number of runs, however earned analysis for being excessively gloomy. Notwithstanding, the century was sufficient to see him hold his center request position for the Second Test at Lord's, the place Australia handled an unaltered group. Previous Test leg spinner and colleague Bill O'Reilly—who was in England as a journalist—criticised the choice of Brown, who had gave off an impression of being discernibly awkward in the new job. He said that in spite of Brown's unbeaten twofold century in his past Test at Lord's in 1938, Sam Loxton and Neil Harvey would be wise to cases to choice. 

Australia won the hurl and batted first at the home of cricket. Centurion Morris fell at 3/166 and new batsman Miller was caught lbw for four soon after. Dark colored came in at 4/173 and helped Lindsay Hassett modify the innings after the two snappy wickets. The two men scored gradually, averaging more than three and half minutes for each run. Subsequent to putting on an association of 43, Hassett was bowled by Yardley, who at that point caught Brown for 24 to leave Australia lurching at 6/225. Darker had hit two sequential half-volleys off his cushions through the leg side for four, and endeavored a third limit in succession to a comparative conveyance. Be that as it may, this third conveyance fell off the pitch all the more rapidly and beat Brown for pace. Australia figured out how to stay away from further breakdown a counterattack from the tail saw them to 350 preceding they bowled England out for 215. The vacationers batted considerably more profitably in the second innings in perfect climate on the third day. Darker joined Miller after Bradman fell at 4/329; Australia had lost 3/33 yet steadied to achieve stumps at 343 moving forward without any more misfortune, with Brown on seven. After the rest day, Australia continued with a lead of 478 runs and six wickets close by. The morning was punctuated by three downpour stoppages. Only ten minutes after the begin, overwhelming precipitation mediated. The climate cleared and Miller and Brown moved to lunch on 63 and 32 individually, with Australia at 4/409. In 88 minutes of play, Australia had included 117 runs. Dark colored was gotten behind from Alec Coxon after lunch without adding to his score for 32, after a 87-run organization with Miller, with the score at 5/416. Bradman inevitably proclaimed at 7/460, 595 keeps running ahead. It would take a world record pursue from England to win the match. The home group lost wickets consistently and succumbed to 186 to lose by 409 runs. Albeit part of an effective group, Brown was unfit to reproduce the hundreds of years he made in every one of his two past Tests at Lord’s on the former visits, and it was to be the last Test of his profession. 

The following match was against Surrey and begun the day after the Test. Dark colored harmed a finger while handling in the main innings, so he was unfit to bat in Australia's first innings. In the second innings, Australia's alternative openers Harvey and Sam Loxton pursued down the 122 keeps running for triumph to finish a 10-wicket win in under 60 minutes. 

Dark colored was refreshed for the accompanying match against Gloucestershire before the Third Test. Loxton scored 159 not out, including in two century associations and driving Australia to 7/774 announced, which was its most astounding score of the visit and established the framework for an innings triumph. Loxton’s exertion was sufficient to remove Brown from his center request position for the Third Test at Old Trafford. As indicated by O’Reilly, Brown had showed up strange in the center request since he was utilized to the opener’s traditional job of shielding against and wearing out the opening bowlers, as opposed to assaulting. Amid the Test, which was drawn, Barnes was harmed and off spinner Ian Johnson was utilized as an improvised opener as Morris was the main master left after Brown’s exclusion. A short time later, Brown oversaw just eight as Australia crushed Middlesex by ten wickets in their solitary area coordinate between Tests. 

Barnes was as yet inaccessible for the Fourth Test, however Brown was not reviewed to open with Morris; rather, Hassett was elevated to open with Morris, while the teenaged Harvey came into the center request. Despite the fact that Hassett fizzled with just 13 and 17 in his two innings, Harvey struck 112 in the principal innings, before Australia pursued down 404 on the last day to set a world record for the most noteworthy effective run-pursue in Test cricket and won by seven wickets. 

Dark colored collaborated the recuperated Barnes and calmly scored 140, preceding being the fifth man out with the score at 344, as Australia amassed 456 and crushed Derbyshire by an innings following the Fourth Test. Hoping to recapture his Test position by sheer weight of runs, Brown began gradually; Barnes made 24 of the initial 29 runs. He took 185 minutes to achieve 50, a lot to the disappointment of the eager observers, before quickening and scoring his next 50 keeps running in 37 minutes. 

In the following match against Glamorgan, Brown scored 16 of every a downpour influenced draw that did not achieve the second innings. He scored 33 and seven in the accompanying match, falling the multiple times to the leg turn of Eric Hollies as Australia crushed Warwickshire by nine wickets. Darker was then refreshed as Australia confronted and drew with Lancashire for the second time on the visit. He returned for the non-top of the line coordinate against Durham, scoring 49 out of Australia's 282 out of a climate influenced attract that neglected to achieve the second innings. Darker was disregarded for determination in the Fifth Test at The Oval. Barnes came back to the group and Australia squashed England by an innings and 149 hurries to take the arrangement 4–0 in the wake of chopping them down for just 52 in the principal innings. 

Seven matches stayed on Bradman's mission to experience a voyage through England without annihilation. Australia batted first against Kent and Brown top-scored with 106. In the wake of putting on 64 with Morris for the principal wicket, he put on 104 each for the following two associations with Bradman and Harvey individually, before falling at 3/272. Darker again batted gradually; he took 255 minutes to achieve triple figures and was welcomed by amusing applauding as he gradually amassed runs while his accomplices assaulted. Dark colored's rejection set off a breakdown; Australia lost their last seven wickets for 89 to finish at 361. Regardless of this, they finished another innings triumph. In the following match against the Gentlemen of England, which was held at Lord's, Brown scored 120, highlighting in a 180-run second wicket association with Bradman, as Australia amassed 5/610 and won by an innings. Previous Australian Test opener and batting accomplice Jack Fingleton said "Dark colored has dependably looked the class batsman that he is when playing at Lord's, and this sublime century, so unique in origination and execution to the one at Canterbury [against Kent], influenced one to reflect what a great opening batsman this arrangement of Tests had managed without". Fingleton made a duck in the following match yet Australia by and by vanquished Somerset by an innings and 374 runs. He at that point made 13 against the South of England in his last top of the line match of the period. The match was washed out, however not before Brown took 4/16 from 4.1 overs in his solitary five star bowling exertion of the visit, tidying up the tail. 

Australia's greatest test in the post-Test visit matches was against the Leveson-Gower's XI. Amid the last Australian visit in 1938, the group was viably a full-quality England outfit, however this time Bradman demanded just six England players from the season's Tests be permitted to contend. After his adversaries had settled their group, Bradman handled a full-quality group, and Brown passed up a major opportunity. The match finished in a draw after various downpour delays. 

The visit finished with two non-top of the line matches against Scotland. In the principal coordinate, Brown was refreshed as the Australians asserted an innings triumph. In the second match, Brown scored 24 not out batting at No. 8 and took a wicket in the second innings as Australia finished the visit with another innings triumph. 

An accomplished right-gave opening batsman, Brown was on his third battle in England, having first visited in 1934 preceding the World War II. Notwithstanding, Brown's greatest years were lost to the war and by 1948, Barnes and Morris had transcended him in the pecking request and become Australia's first-decision opening pair. Darker was chosen as the save opener, a choice that created discussion among savants who trusted he was past his best. 

Amid the visit matches, which were typically played continuously with just one or no days between apparatuses, Bradman turned the trio of openers, so one would by and large be refreshed while the other two opened, yet in the Tests, Morris and Barnes were favored. Bradman suited Brown in his first-decision group by playing him out of position in the center request in the initial two Tests and against Worcestershire and the MCC, when he handled the most grounded XI. Notwithstanding, Brown seemed awkward in the new job, and subsequent to making 73 keeps running at 24.33 in the initial two Tests, he was dropped. 

All things considered, Brown was fruitful in the visit matches when he played as an opener. He finished the visit with eight centuries and an aggregate of 1,448 top of the line keeps running at a normal of 57.92, behind just Bradman, Hassett and Morris in the runs and midpoints, with a most noteworthy score of 200 against Cambridge University. Dark colored's count of eight centuries was second just to Bradman, and took his count on English soil to 18 top notch tons. Barring the matches against Worcestershire, the MCC and the initial two Tests, in which Brown had scored 25, 26, 17, 24 and 32 batting in the center request while Barnes and Morris opened, Brown scored 1,324 keeps running at 66.20 while opening in different matches, which would have placed him in an unmistakable fourth spot on the batting midpoints. Following his exclusion from the Test group halfway through the visit, Brown batted in a moderate and preservationist way so as to score more runs and recover his position, a lot to the shame of the groups. 

An extremely incidental off spinner, Brown took 4/16 against the South of England in his solitary top notch bowling task of the visit. It was his best profession bowling figures—he gathered just six wickets in his top of the line vocation. He likewise took 18 gets in the top notch installations. 

n-[1] 

This announcement can be checked by counseling the majority of the scorecards for the matches, as recorded here.