El Viaje Misterioso de Nuestro Jomer (The Mysterious Voyage of Homer) 

"El Viaje Misterioso de Nuestro Jomer (The Mysterious Voyage of Homer)", () otherwise called "The Mysterious Voyage of Our Homer", is the ninth scene in the eighth period of the American energized TV arrangement "The Simpsons". It initially publicized on the Fox organize in the United States on January 5, 1997. In the scene, Homer eats a few hot stew peppers and daydreams, making him go on a strange voyage. Following this, he addresses his association with Marge and goes on an adventure to discover his perfect partner. 

"El Viaje Misterioso de Nuestro Jomer (The Mysterious Voyage of Homer)" was composed by Ken Keeler and coordinated by Jim Reardon. The scene investigates subjects of marriage, network, and liquor use. Homer's voyage highlights strange activity to delineate the detailed mental trip. The scene visitor stars Johnny Cash as the "Space Coyote". 

On a specific end of the week, Marge endeavors to occupy the consideration of Homer in unusual ways, such as removing certain things of the morning paper and smoking in the house. After venturing outside, Homer scents the aromas of Springfield's yearly bean stew cook-off. Marge confesses to endeavoring to shield Homer from going to because of his smashed jokes the earlier year, yet releases him as long as he guarantees to not drink brew. At the cook-off, Homer exhibits an exceptional capacity to withstand hot nourishments, yet is singed by Chief Wiggum's super-hot stew and flees shouting as the town people chuckle. Sitting at a table with Ralph Wiggum extinguishing the warmth with water, he about beverages liquefied flame wax. At the point when Ralph brings up out, he gets the plan to utilize the wax to coat his mouth, empowering him to eat a few of Chief Wiggum's peppers. 

In the wake of winning the stew eating challenge, the peppers influence Homer to fantasize. In an unusual dreamland, he experiences a snake, butterfly and tortoise, and unintentionally annihilates the sun. He touches base at an extensive Mayan pyramid and meets his soul direct as a coyote, who encourages him to discover his perfect partner and questions Homer's presumption that Marge is his. In the mean time, Marge knows about Homer's unusual conduct and trusting this was because of drinking liquor, drives home without him. 

The following day, Homer rises and shines in a green. Returning home, he discovers Marge irate with him for his humiliating conduct at the cook-off and requests pardoning, yet she cannot. Homer makes note of the two's basic identity contrasts and questions in the event that she is really his perfect partner. While meandering the roads around evening time, he supposes a desolate beacon guardian is his perfect partner, however finds the beacon is worked by a machine. Seeing a moving toward ship, Homer wrecks the beacon's light trusting its travelers will stop and become a close acquaintence with him. A regretful Marge arrives, having known precisely where Homer would go, and the pair acknowledge they truly are perfect partners regardless of their disparities. Marge fixes the light so the ship does not keep running into them, yet it steers into the rocks adjacent, spilling its freight of hotpants. Springfield's residents joyfully recover them as Marge and Homer grasp. 

The scene was pitched as ahead of schedule as the third season by George Meyer, who was keen on a scene dependent on the books of Carlos Castaneda. Meyer had needed to have a scene including an otherworldly voyage that was not incited by medications, thus he chose to utilize "extremely hot" bean stew peppers. The staff, with the exception of Matt Groening, felt it was unreasonably odd for the show by then. Bill Oakley and Josh Weinstein revived the story, and chose to utilize it for season eight. 

The greater part of the pipedream succession was vivified totally by David Silverman. Silverman did not need the danger of sending it to South Korea, as he needed it to look precisely as he had envisioned it, including rendered foundations to give a delicate supernatural feel to the scene. The coyote was deliberately attracted a boxier way so it looked "other-common" and not at all like different characters. Amid Homer's voyage, the mists in a single shot are live-activity film, and 3D PC movement was utilized for the mammoth butterfly. Amid a similar pipedream, Ned Flanders' line was treated on a Mac PC so it expanded and diminished pitch. The Fox blue pencils sent a note to the journalists, addressing Homer covering his mouth with hot wax. The note read: "To debilitate impersonation by youthful and stupid watchers, when Homer starts to empty hot wax into his mouth, if it's not too much trouble have him shout in torment so children will comprehend that doing this would really consume their mouths." The shout was not included; notwithstanding, they added discourse from Ralph Wiggum, addressing Homer on his activity. The chief additionally made a "wax-outline" for Homer for the artists to pursue amid the succession when Homer's mouth is covered with flame wax. 

Homer awakening on a green was a reference to something that happened to a companion of the makers, who passed out, and woke up on a fairway. He needed to purchase a guide from 7-Eleven so as to discover where he was. He found that not exclusively was he in an alternate town, however he was additionally in an alternate state. He at that point needed to walk a few miles so as to return to his companion's home, which was the last spot he was the prior night. 

Johnny Cash and Bob Dylan were the scholars' main two decisions to play the coyote; the essayists had needed to utilize one of The Highwaymen as the voice of the soul manage. Bounce Dylan had turned the show down commonly, having recently been offered a job in the season seven scene "Homerpalooza". Johnny Cash was offered the job, which he acknowledged. Matt Groening depicted Cash's appearance as "one of the best upsets the show has ever had". 

The primary plot of the scene depends on crafted by Carlos Castaneda, with a portion of the Native American symbolism being like that utilized in the film "Hits the dance floor with Wolves". The beacon attendant really being a PC is a reference to the scene of "The Twilight Zone" called "The Old Man in the Cave", in which a man in a cavern ends up being a PC. The principle topic from "The Good, the Bad and the Ugly" is utilized amid the scenes when Homer strolls into the bean stew celebration, and the melody "At Seventeen" by Janis Ian plays out of sight as Homer strolls through the town of Springfield searching for his perfect partner after he awakens from his vision. The scene toward the finish of Homer's pipedream, when the train is going towards him, is a reference to the opening titles of "Soul Train". Homer's record accumulation highlights collections by Jim Nabors, Glen Campbell, and The Doodletown Pipers. 

In its unique communicate, "El Viaje Misterioso de Nuestro Jomer (The Mysterious Voyage of Homer)" completed 34th in evaluations for the seven day stretch of December 30, 1996 – January 5, 1997, with a Nielsen rating of 9.0, equal to roughly 8.7 million survey family units. It was the most elevated appraised appear on the Fox organize that week, beating "Thousand years". 

The writers of the book "I Can't Believe It's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide", Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood, stated: "Homer's bean stew initiated trip is splendid, finished with the strange tortoise and Indian soul manage." The scene was set eighth on AskMen.com's "Best 10: Simpsons Episodes" list, and in his book "Planet Simpson", Chris Turner named the scene as being one of his five top choices, despite the fact that he found the consummation excessively nostalgic. In 2011, Keith Plocek of "LA Weekly"s Squid Ink blog recorded "El Viaje Misterioso de Nuestro Jomer (The Mysterious Voyage of Homer)" as the best scene of the show with a sustenance topic. "IGN" positioned Johnny Cash's execution as the fourteenth best visitor appearance in the show's history. Money additionally showed up on AOL's rundown of their 25 top choice "The Simpsons" visitor stars, and on "The Times" Simon Crerar's rundown of the 33 most entertaining appearances ever of show. Andrew Martin of Prefix Mag named Cash his third-most loved melodic visitor on "The Simpsons" out of a rundown of ten. Fred Topel of Crave Online named it the best scene of the whole arrangement.