New York State Route 9M 

New York State RouteÂ 9M (NYÂ 9M) was a state thruway in Warren County, New York, in the United States. It was a goad course of U.S. Routeâ 9 (USÂ 9) that to a great extent pursued the eastern bank of the Schroon River. The southern end of the course was at NYÂ 8 in the town of Horicon close to the villa of Starbuckville. Its northern end was at USÂ 9 in the Chester village of Pottersville. NYÂ 9M was known as East Schroon River Road and Glendale Road and traversed the southern tip of Schroon Lake. 

NYÂ 9M was relegated to what had been assigned as authoritative Routeâ 22-c from 1913 to 1921. It went on for not exactly 10 years as it was expelled . Its previous steering is currently kept up by Warren County as a major aspect of three area courses, to be specific County Routeâ 55 (CRÂ 55), CRÂ 62, and County Routeâ 64. 

NYÂ 9M started at a crossing point with NYÂ 8 (presently CRÂ 53) north of the village of Starbuckville in the town of Horicon. The course pursued Valentine Pond Road north for an immaterial separation, at that point advanced westbound along the eastern bank of the Schroon River on East Schroon River Road. Over the waterway, Carl Turner Road, a privately looked after thruway, pursued a steering parallel to that of NYÂ 9M on the other shore. The two streets step by step bended northward, reflecting a comparable turn in the stream's course. Carl Turner Road reached an end here; be that as it may, NYÂ 9M forged ahead. Close to an intersection with cutting edge Short Street, NYÂ 9M started to veer off from the stream. 

North of Short Street, NYÂ 9M bended back toward the northwest, passing Smith Pond and going through forests as it drew nearer Schroon Lake. It at that point traversed the southern tip of the lake and entered the town of Chester on the contrary bank. The course reached an end instantly a short time later at an intersection with USÂ 9 in the villa of Pottersville. 

In 1913, the New York State Legislature made Routeâ 22-c, an unsigned authoritative course stretching out from State Highwayâ 1023 (later NYÂ 8 and now CRÂ 53) close Starbuckville to administrative Routeâ 22 (present day USÂ 9) in Pottersville. The Routeâ 22-c assignment was dispensed with on Marchâ 1, 1921, as a major aspect of a halfway renumbering of New York's authoritative course framework. In the 1930 renumbering of state thruways in New York, several state-kept up interstates that did not have a marked assignment were allocated one. The previous steering of authoritative Routeâ 22-c was assigned as NYÂ 9M by the next year. NYÂ 9M was brief, be that as it may, as it stopped to exist . Its previous steering is presently kept up by Warren County as CRÂ 55 from previous NYÂ 8 (CRÂ 53) to East Schroon River Road, CRÂ 64 from Valentine Pond Road to East Shore Road, and CRÂ 62 from East Shore Road to USÂ 9.