Bart Gets an Elephant 

"Bart Gets an Elephant" is the seventeenth scene of "The Simpsons"<nowiki>'</nowiki> fifth season. It initially broadcast on the Fox organize in the United States on March 31, 1994. In this scene, Bart wins a radio challenge and is granted a full-developed African elephant that he names Stampy. After Stampy wrecks the Simpsons' home and eats all the nourishment, Homer chooses to offer Stampy to an ivory vendor. Bart flees with Stampy to spare his pet, yet the family finds the two at a gallery show, where Homer sinks into a tar pit. Homer is spared by Stampy, thus gives the elephant away to a creature asylum. 

The scene was composed by John Swartzwelder, and coordinated by Jim Reardon. It presented the anecdotal elephant Stampy, and imprints the main appearance of the common character Cletus Spuckler. The scene highlights social references to the melodies "Sixteen Tons" and "Do-Re-Mi", and the La Brea Tar Pits group of tar pits situated in Hancock Park in Los Angeles, California. Since airing, the scene has gotten for the most part positive audits from TV faultfinders. It procured a Nielsen rating of 10.7, and was the most elevated appraised appear on the Fox arrange the week it disclosed. 

Amid cleaning day at the Simpsons' home, Bart wins a KBBL radio challenge after the station's DJs, Bill and Marty, ring him. They give Bart the decision of two prizes: $10,000 in real money or a full-developed African elephant. Bart picks the elephant. This amazements Bill and Marty, who trusted that no one could ever pick an elephant, and in this way have no elephant to give away. They offer Bart an assortment of different prizes, all of which he won't. Word spreads all through town about Bill and Marty's refusal to give Bart an elephant, provoking their manager to give them a decision: either mastermind conveyance of the elephant, or lose their employments. They settle on the previous choice. 

Bart names his new elephant Stampy and binds him to a post in the terrace. Lisa starts griping that keeping an elephant as a pet is brutal, while Homer is worried that Stampy will eat him out of house and home. With an end goal to counterbalance nourishment costs, Bart and Homer display Stampy by charging clients to pet and ride him, yet they neglect to make enough cash to take care of the elephant's sustenance costs for one day. Homer and Marge choose that their home is unacceptable for an elephant to live in, and that Stampy is too costly to even consider maintaining as a pet, and tell the kids the elephant must go. The family is visited by a delegate of a diversion save, who says their sections of land of open land like African Savannah would be a decent environment for the elephant to live in, however Homer turns them down when they won't give him any cash since the hold itself is a not-for-profit association. In any case, as the family is considering what to do about Stampy, a natural life poacher named Mr. Blackheart offers to purchase Stampy. Homer needs to take the cash, however Lisa is against the thought — particularly since Mr. Blackheart straightforwardly confesses to being an ivory seller. Similarly as Homer and Mr. Blackheart achieve an arrangement, Stampy and Bart keep running off, unleashing ruin all through Springfield, and are soon mysteriously absent. The family starts seeking and discovers them at the Springfield Tar Pits, where Homer stalls out in one of the tar pits. Homer is liberated by Stampy, and appreciatively consents to give the elephant to a natural life save. 

The scene was composed by John Swartzwelder, and coordinated by Jim Reardon. "The Simpsons"' maker Matt Groening thought it was a "quintessential" Swartzwelder scene, and official maker/show sprinter David Mirkin said it was an "awesome occupation by a standout amongst the most productive scholars of the show". The most vital thing to Mirkin while making the scene was to ensure that the elephant would be a "jerk" and carry on discourteously, in contrast to different creatures on the show. For instance, rather than putting individuals on his back, Stampy would place them in his mouth. Mirkin said the elephant "never fully bonds since it's an extremely quarrelsome creature, an idea that was imperative to this scene". Stampy has since been utilized a few times in jokes later on in the arrangement. For instance, Stampy showed up in the season nine scene "Marvel on Evergreen Terrace" in one Bart had always wanted, and in the season fourteen scene "Huge Marge", where he is utilized by Bart in a trick to help Krusty the Clown win back his ubiquity. Stampy showed up quickly in "The Simpsons Movie", where he attempts to separate the goliath glass vault brought down over Springfield. The scene additionally presents the character Cletus Spuckler. He is appeared one of the "slack-jawed country folks" gaping at Stampy in the Simpson family's lawn. Cletus isn't named in the scene, so the staff essentially alluded to him as the Slack-Jawed Yokel. 

The Springfield Tar Pits are enlivened by the La Brea Tar Pits situated in Hancock Park in Los Angeles, California. The gallery out of sight of the scene where Homer sinks into one of the tar pits looks like the George C. Page Museum of the La Brea Discoveries. At the point when Stampy flees, he passes the Republican National Convention, with individuals cheering, and afterward he passes the Democratic National Convention, with individuals booing. This is a reference to the way that an elephant is the image of the Republican Party. Homer uses Mr. Chemical, a farce of the cleanser brand Mr. Clean, to clean the cellar. As Bart cleans, he incidentally scours the paint off an "American Gothic" painting holding tight the divider. Under the paint is a message marked by the painter, Grant Wood, perusing: "In the event that you can peruse this, you cleaned excessively hard." 

The scene in which Stampy's eye is seen through a window of the Simpson family's home is like a scene with a Tyrannosaurus rex in the film "Jurassic Park". While cleaning the house, Marge turns on the radio and the tune "Sixteen Tons" by Merle Travis is heard. The scene in which Homer crashes his vehicle into a deer statue at the Springfield Tar Pits spoofs the verses to the "Sound of Music" tune "Do-Re-Mi" as Homer yells: "D'oh!" trailed by Lisa: "A deer!" and Marge: "A female deer!" Homer peruses an old "television Guide" in which the rundown of a scene of "Gomer Pyle, U.S.M.C." peruses "Gomer upsets Sgt. Carter", a conceivable summary for each scene of that arrangement. He likewise envisions the scene with an idea of both Carter and Pyle remaining by one another. Carter hollers, "Pyle!" and Pyle reacts, "Shazam!". As Stampy unleashes devastation all through Springfield, Patty and Selma are sucked up by a tornado and fly through the air in recliners, like a scene in the 1939 film "The Wizard of Oz". 

In its unique communicate, "Bart Gets an Elephant" completed forty-second in the evaluations for the seven day stretch of March 28 to April 20, 1994, with a Nielsen rating of 10.7, equal to 10 million review family units. It was the most elevated evaluated appear on the Fox organize that week. 

The scene won an Environmental Media Award in the Best Television Episodic Comedy class, which has been granted each year since 1991 to the best TV scene with a natural message. The scene has likewise gotten a Genesis Award in the Best Television Comedy Series class. The Genesis Awards are given out every year by the Humane Society of the United States "to the news and diversion media for sparkling that spotlight into the darkest corners of creature misuse and abuse." 

Since airing, the scene has gotten generally positive surveys from TV faultfinders. The writers of the book "I Can't Believe It's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide", Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood, stated: "Another top pick. It's difficult to clarify the uncommon intrigue of this scene. Maybe this is on the grounds that Homer is so outstandingly imbecilic. Or on the other hand maybe in light of the fact that it contains the 'D'oh!' 'A deer!' 'A female deer!' choke." This muffle was likewise lauded by BBC News' Mark Milne, who stated: "[It] just makes me laugh out loud without fail. Splendid!" DVD Movie Guide's Colin Jacobson thought the fifth season included "a lot of projects with conceivably mushy ideas, for example, "Profound Space Homer" and "Bart Gets an Elephant". Nonetheless, he thought the scene figured out how to "effectively defeated its conceivable blemishes" to transform into a "fine program". Homer's line "Marge, I concur with you in principle. In principle, socialism works — "In principle"" was Jacobson's most loved of the scene. Patrick Bromley of DVD Verdict gave the scene an evaluation of An, and Bill Gibron of DVD Talk gave it a score of 4 out of 5.