Summer of 4 Ft. 2 

"Summer of 4 Ft. 2" is the twenty-fifth and last scene of "The Simpsons"<nowiki>'</nowiki> seventh season. It initially broadcast on the Fox organize in the United States on May 19, 1996. In the scene, the Simpson family remain in Ned Flanders' shoreline house. Staying nearby with another arrangement of kids, Lisa ends up prominent, while Bart is forgotten. Bart endeavors to undermine his sister's freshly discovered acknowledgment, yet fizzles. 

The scene was composed by Dan Greaney and coordinated by Mark Kirkland. The scene visitor stars Christina Ricci, who recorded her lines via telephone as opposed to going into the studio. The shoreline house at Little Pwagmattasquarmsettport the Simpson family remains in depends on then-show sprinter Josh Weinstein's folks' home in New Hampshire. The scene highlights social references to Pippi Longstocking, "The New Yorker" character Eustace Tilley, and Alice and The Hatter from "Alice's Adventures in Wonderland". Since airing, the scene has gotten positive surveys from TV pundits. It gained a Nielsen rating of 8.8, and was the second most astounding appraised appear on the Fox organize the week it circulated. 

Lisa discovers on the most recent day of school how disliked she is when no one signs her yearbook. In the mean time, Ned Flanders offers the Simpson family the utilization of his shoreline house at Little Pwagmattasquarmsettport over the mid year. Marge enjoys the thought and proposes that Bart ought to bring Milhouse and that Lisa ought to bring a companion as well. In any case, Lisa has no companions to convey and chooses to change her picture therefore. In the wake of achieving the shoreline house, Lisa reveals to Marge that she neglected to pack, so they go out on the town to shop for new garments. Lisa purchases another arrangement of garments that she accepts will make her look "cool", and goes to search for some cool youngsters. 

At the point when Lisa prevails with regards to making companions with a gathering of nearby youngsters, Bart winds up envious and plots retribution against Lisa. He chooses to show Lisa a thing or two by demonstrating her companions her yearbook, uncovering that she is a geek. Lisa is enraged at Bart, imagining that his exposure has dismissed her companions. In the end, at a jamboree, Bart acknowledges how discouraged Lisa has progressed toward becoming, and how he cost her the main companions she has had. In any case, when Lisa comes back to the shoreline house from the jubilee she discovers her companions in the demonstration of designing the Simpsons' vehicle with ocean shells in her respect, and they clarify that they like her for her identity. To make up with Lisa, Bart has them sign her yearbook. 

The scene was composed by Dan Greaney, and coordinated by Mark Kirkland. It was Greaney's second scene on "The Simpsons". The staff of the show needed to complete a late spring scene on the grounds that there was "such a great amount of stuff" about summer travels that they felt must be shrouded in a scene. David Silverman, one of the show's illustrators, especially enjoyed the scene since he thought it caught the sentiment of being on summer get-away. 

The zone in which the Flanders family's shoreline house is situated in depends on the Cape Cod landmass. A large number of the authors of "The Simpsons" invested energy in Cape Cod so they chose to demonstrate the new areas on it. The artists saw Cape Cod photos to get motivation for the scene, and one of the show's experience architects, Lance Wilder, experienced childhood here. The shoreline house depends on then-show sprinter Josh Weinstein's folks' home in New Hampshire, which the scholars had visited ordinarily. They played a few table games when they were there, which gave them the plan to have to the Simpson family play the "Secret Date" tabletop game in the scene. Silverman said that the scene was hard to quicken and coordinate since it had such huge numbers of new and definite foundations and totally extraordinary areas. 

American performing artist Christina Ricci visitor featured in the scene as Erin, one of Lisa's new companions. Ricci was not ready to gone to the account studio, so she recorded every last bit of her lines via telephone. Weinstein, who was an aficionado of Ricci, figured she completed a decent exhibition in the scene. 

The scene's title is a spoof of the 1971 film "Summer of '42". Lisa has a fantasy in which the accompanying anecdotal characters show up: Pippi Longstocking, "The New Yorker" character Eustace Tilley, and Alice and The Hatter from "Alice's Adventures in Wonderland". Milhouse thinks about Lisa's new appearance to the character Blossom from the American TV arrangement "Bloom". TeeJay's ZayMart is a satire of old retailer Zayre and parent organization T.J. Maxx. Homer duplicates a scene from the 1973 film "American Graffiti" when he unemotionally gets some characteristically humiliating items at the store so as to get some illicit firecrackers. The "Secret Date" tabletop game that the family is compelled to play is a real Milton Bradley Company table game from the 1960s. Weinstein played it as a kid and asserted it to be "an extremely baffling amusement to play as a young man" on account of the female target crowd. The Beach Boys tune "Throughout the entire Summer" plays amid the credits. 

In its unique communicate, "Summer of 4 Ft. 2" completed forty-second (tied with "Melrose Place" and "Wedded... with Children") in the evaluations for the seven day stretch of May 13 to May 19, 1996, with a Nielsen rating of 8.8. The scene was the second most astounding appraised appear on the Fox organize that week (tied with "Melrose Place" and "Wedded... with Children"), following "The X-Files". 

Since airing, the scene has gotten positive audits from TV commentators. The writers of the book "I Can't Believe It's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide", Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood, stated: "This scene will inspire an emotional response with anybody that is ever endeavored to fit in with the group [...] Lisa gets the opportunity to demonstrate the numerous aspects of her character, and there's a brilliant droll succession as Homer attempts to discard a firecracker." Dave Foster of DVD Times commended the scene and stated: "The scene is just my most loved Lisa scene paying little respect to season. From quiet to cool and furiously forceful, we've once in a while observed Lisa so tempting as we do here, and the scene's numerous components including the side stories for the other relatives come full circle in one of the best this season brings to the table." DVD Movie Guide's Colin Jacobson delighted in the scene and said that he prefers how it tends to Bart's hatred of Lisa's ubiquity. "In truth, it makes [Bart] excessively mean, however it's engaging", he included. Jacobson proceeded to state: "Marge gets the best minute once more, as I cherish watching her peaceful way to deal with the amusement carts." Jennifer Malkowski of DVD Verdict considered the best pieces of the scene to be the scenes that highlight Milhouse, especially his yearbook message to Lisa and the scene with the Mystery Date table game. She finished up her audit by giving the scene an evaluation of A.