Typhoon Wukong (2006) 

Serious Tropical Storm Wukong was a moderate moving tropical violent wind which created exuberant rains over Japan. The tenth named tempest of the 2006 Pacific hurricane season, Wukong created out of a tropical discouragement over the vast waters of the western Pacific Ocean. On Augustâ 13, both the Japan Meteorological Agency (JMA) and the Joint Typhoon Warning Center (JTWC) ordered the dejection as a hurricane. The tempest went along a bending way south of Japan, engrossing the remainders of Tropical Storm Sonamu on Augustâ 15 before turning towards the west. Wukong made landfall at pinnacle power late on Augustâ 17 close Miyazaki City in southern Kyĺťshĺť. The violent wind stayed over land for about 24â hours before moving out over the Sea of Japan. The tempest debilitated to a tropical melancholy before scattering on Augustâ 21. Because of the moderate development of the tempest, it created substantial downpours, topping at 516â mm (20.3â in). Two individuals were slaughtered because of unpleasant oceans delivered by the tempest and three others were harmed. 

On Augustâ 12, the Japan Meteorological Agency (JMA) started observing a tropical discouragement situated toward the south of Chichi-jima island. The sorrow shaped inside a monsoonal gyre which likewise generated Tropical Storm Sonamu. The Joint Typhoon Warning Center (JTWC) characterized the framework as Tropical Depression 11W a few hours after the JMA while the framework was situated about 140â km (85â mi) south of Iwo Jima. The despondency step by step fortified as it moved towards the northwest. From the get-go Augustâ 13, it was moved up to a typhoon and given the name "Wukong"; a name which was contributed by China. The names signifies "the lord of the monkeys" and was highlighted in the novel "Voyage toward the West". The tempest hindered altogether as an edge constructed eastbound over Japan. On Augustâ 14, Wukong turned towards the upper east and achieved its pinnacle force with winds of 95â km/h (60â mph ) as an extreme typhoon. 

In the meantime, the JTWC surveyed Wukong to have achieved its underlying pinnacle power with winds of 95â km/h (60â mph ). The following day, the tempest started to quicken because of a connection with the adjacent Tropical Storm Sonamu. Wukong consumed the debilitating Sonamu later in the day preceding turning towards the west. On Augustâ 16, the tempest turned towards the northwest because of a shortcoming in the edge close Japan. Wukong made landfall late on Augustâ 17 close Miyazaki City in southern Kyĺťshĺť. As the tempest made landfall, the JTWC evaluated Wukong to have winds of 100â km/h (65â mph ). The violent wind gradually traversed land, entering the Sea of Japan about 24â hours after landfall. A few hours in the wake of entering the Sea of Japan, the JMA minimized Wukong to a tropical misery. The sorrow continued for two more days before disseminating close to the Russian coastline. 

As indicated by Japanese climate authorities, overwhelming precipitation, flood, tempest and high wave admonitions were put into impact for all of Kyĺťshĺť and neighboring territories in Honshĺť. The two biggest air bearers in Japan, Japan Airlines and All Nippon Airways, dropped somewhere around 36 household flights in front of the tempest. A few of the biggest oil refineries ended oil item shipments from three refineries. Kyushu Railways delayed administrations on five lines, one of which crossed the whole prefecture. Long separation ships were additionally closed down. Iwakuni, Yamaguchi was put under Tropical Cyclone Condition of Readiness 3 and Sasebo, Nagasaki was set under Tropical Cyclone Condition of Readiness Storm Watch. 

Wukong delivered heavy rains over Japan, cresting at 516â mm (20.3â in) in Hinokage, Miyazaki Prefecture. Flooding in Kyĺťshĺť and the Yamaguchi Prefecture caused the departure of around 300 family units. No less than 200 habitations were left without power in Kyĺťshĺť. Two individuals were slaughtered by harsh oceans delivered by Wukong, and three others were harmed in tempest related mishaps. An aggregate of seven avalanches happened, one of which harmed a few homes. As the tempest brushed the Korean Peninsula, it created substantial downpours, yet caused no known harm.