Tropical Depression Nine (2001) 

Tropical Depression Nine caused minor flooding in Central America in Septemberâ 2001. The ninth tropical typhoon of the 2001 Atlantic sea tempest season, the sorrow created from a tropical wave in the southwestern Caribbean Sea on Septemberâ 19. Without critical strengthening, the discouragement made landfall in Puerto Cabezas, Nicaragua from the get-go Septemberâ 20, which was around six hours in the wake of turning into a tropical typhoon. When inland over Central America, the wretchedness noteworthy disintegrated and scattered soon thereafter, subsequent to going on for under 24â hours. The leftovers rose into the Pacific Ocean and later formed into Hurricane Juliette. Effect from the dejection was fairly minor. Albeit continued breezes ashore did not surpass 30â mph (55â km/h), a fallen tree harmed three youngsters in El Salvador. Furthermore, overwhelming precipitation overflowed in any event 200â homes in San Salvador and immersed 15â farms. The sadness did not result in fatalities and harm brought about by it is obscure. 

A tropical wave left the west shoreline of Africa and rose into the Atlantic Ocean on Septemberâ 11. Subsequent to following westbound for five days, the wave entered the Caribbean Sea on Septemberâ 16. Convection consistently expanded in both inclusion and force, and by Septemberâ 19, the framework achieved the southwestern Caribbean Sea. Satellite symbolism and surface perceptions demonstrated that Tropical Depression Nine shaped at 1800Â UTC on Septemberâ 19, while found 50â miles (80â km) north-northwest of San Andres Island. 

At first, the sorrow had two focuses of course, one east of Costa Rica and one east of Puerto Cabezas, Nicaragua. Since the tempest movement was increasingly extraordinary and steady at the northern dissemination, warnings were started utilizing the last mentioned. PC gauge models anticipated that the dejection would influence landfall in Nicaragua and afterward to enter the eastern Pacific Ocean inside 36â hours. Other PC gauge models isolated it into two frameworks, with the northern focus going into the Bay of Campeche and the southern focus going westbound through Costa Rica and into the Pacific while reinforcing into a "noteworthy tropical violent wind". Albeit just a tropical gloom, upper dimension outpouring was round and was characteristic of a progressively "develop" tropical typhoon. 

At 0000Â UTC on Septemberâ 20, the discouragement made landfall close Punta Cabezas, Nicaragua with winds of 35â mph (55â km/h) and debilitating was promptly gauge. After three hours, the National Hurricane Center issued its last warning, as the lower level focus turned out to be ineffectively characterized due to connection with the mountains of Central America and profound rainstorm action had essentially decreased. The National Hurricane Center noticed the likelihood of recovery, if the flow went into the Pacific Ocean inside a couple of days. In spite of the fact that the misery never redeveloped, the leftover tropical wave rose into the Pacific Ocean and added to the advancement of Hurricane Juliette on Septemberâ 21. 

Endless supply of the tropical gloom, a typhoon watch was issued from Bluefields, Nicaragua to Dangriga, Belize. At the point when the melancholy made landfall, this notice was stopped. Inhabitants in El Salvador were encouraged to stay away from waterways because of conceivable flooding however no obligatory departures were set up. A green alarm was issued in Nicaragua because of the risk of overwhelming downpours and high breezes. This alarm stayed in actuality until Septemberâ 21. Three kids were harmed by a fallen tree in the nation. The most astounding supported breezes ashore from the despondency were accounted for at Punta Cabezas, Nicaragua with winds of 30â mph (50â km/h) and a base weight of . An aggregate of downpour was recorded in Bluefields while up to was assessed to have fallen in rocky territories. 

In El Salvador, overwhelming downpours from the melancholy eased dry season conditions; be that as it may, flooding likewise immersed 200â homes in San Salvador along the Acelhuate River. Fifteen homesteads were immersed by flooding, five of which were obliterated. Seventy individuals cleared to covers set up after the tempest by the nearby Red Cross and military. Military teams were immediately sent to help tidy up the harms on Septemberâ 22. Despite the fact that it ignored Central America, there are no reports of harm or passings in the locale because of the tropical dejection.