Not All Dogs Go to Heaven 

"Not All Dogs Go to Heaven" is the eleventh scene of the seventh period of the American enlivened TV arrangement "Family Guy". It initially circulated on the Fox organize in the United States on March 29, 2009. The scene was coordinated by Greg Colton and composed by Danny Smith. In the scene, Quahog has its yearly "Star Trek" show and the cast individuals from "" are visitors. After he was unfit to ask the on-screen characters any inquiries at a Q&A session, Stewie assembles a transporter in his room to shaft the cast over and go through the day with them. Then, Meg turns into a conceived again Christian and endeavors to change over the agnostic Brian to Christianity. 

The scene collected blended audits from faultfinders and got a 4.8/7 Nielsen rating. "Star Trek: The Next Generation"s Patrick Stewart, Jonathan Frakes, Brent Spiner, LeVar Burton, Gates McFadden, Michael Dorn, Wil Wheaton, Denise Crosby, and Marina Sirtis all visitor featured as themselves, and Adam West and Rob Lowe show up toward the finish of the scene in a real to life scene. 

Meg gets the mumps when the Griffins go to Quahog's yearly "Star Trek" show, since Peter constrained her to remain beside an unreliable participant with the mumps to snap a photo, trusting him to be in outfit as an outsider. While recouping in bed, Meg turns into a conceived again Christian subsequent to watching Kirk Cameron on TV and starts disturbing everybody with her convictions. Meg is astonished to discover that Brian is an agnostic and endeavors to persuade him to atone and change over to Christianity, yet he more than once won't. At last taking extreme measures, Meg gets the message out of Brian's skepticism around Quahog, which for the most part loathes nonbelievers, making him a social pariah. 

After being made a pariah, Brian is restricted from each bar and comfort store in Quahog, making it unthinkable for him to suffocate his distresses. Frantic, and experiencing incoherence tremens (he fantasizes seeing a few mixed refreshments imploring him to drink them), Brian fakes his contrition and persuades Meg to stop all threats against him so he can return to drinking, however she takes him to consume books that are "unsafe to God" (counting "On the Origin of Species" by Charles Darwin, "A Brief History of Time" by Stephen Hawking, and a book titled "Rationale for First Graders"). A sickened Brian concedes his feign and endeavors to persuade Meg that what she is doing isn't right. At the point when Meg will not tune in, Brian indicates out her that in the event that there were really a cherishing God, at that point he would not have made Meg to have an appealing mother like Lois yet have her to all the more physically take after Peter, and that she would not be brought into an existence where everybody holds her in hatred. Feeling embarrassed, Meg surrenders to Brian's contention and apologizes for her conduct, admitting that she doesn't have an inkling how she can feel adored. Brian then guarantees her that the appropriate responses are inside herself, and the genuine importance of their reality is out there some place. A while later, it is uncovered that the whole "Family Guy" universe happens inside the atoms of a lampshade in the common room of Adam West and Rob Lowe. 

In the interim, incensed that he didn't get an opportunity to solicit the cast from "" any inquiries at the show, and the way that the cast rather responded to questions totally irrelevant to "Star Trek", Stewie fabricates a real "Star Trek" transporter and shafts the cast over to talk with them (in a gesture to the TNG scene "Skin of Evil", Denise Crosby is executed in a show of power). Stewie chooses to go through the entire day with the cast, which incorporates taking Cleveland's van, eating at McDonald's, going bowling, and heading off to a jamboree. In any case, they gripe about minor things and extraordinarily pester Stewie, who bars everybody back subsequent to expressing that they have demolished "Star Trek: The Next Generation" for him. 

"Not All Dogs Go to Heaven" was coordinated by arrangement customary Greg Colton, in his second scene of the period (his initial one being "Street to Germany"). It was composed by ordinary author and repeating voice performing artist Danny Smith, in his first scene of the period. Arrangement regulars Peter Shin and James Purdum filled in as overseeing chiefs. Seth MacFarlane, "Family Guy"s maker and official maker, is an enthusiast of "Star Trek" and showed up as designer Ensign Rivers on "", in "" (season 3, scene 20) and "" (season 4, scene 15). Previous "" cast individuals have additionally shown up in "Family Guy": Patrick Stewart, for instance, quickly voiced Peter Griffin (regularly played by MacFarlane) in "No Meals on Wheels" (season 5, scene 14), his "American Dad!" character, Avery Bullock in "Lois Kills Stewie" (season 6, scene 5), and his "Star Trek: The Next Generation" character Captain Jean-Luc Picard in "Subside's Got Woods" (season 4, scene 11); Jonathan Frakes, Michael Dorn and Marina Sirtis likewise showed up in "Dwindle's Got Woods" as their particular "Star Trek: The Next Generation" characters William Riker, Worf, and Counselor Deanna Troi. 

"Not All Dogs Go to Heaven" includes the whole unique cast of "Star Trek: The Next Generation": Stewart as Captain Picard; Frakes as Riker; Gates McFadden as Doctor Beverly Crusher; Brent Spiner as Lieutenant Commander Data; Dorn as Worf; Sirtis as Troi; LeVar Burton as Chief Engineer Geordi La Forge; Wil Wheaton as Wesley Crusher; and Denise Crosby, whose character Tasha Yar kicked the bucket amid "Star Trek: The Next Generation"s first season. It is additionally the first run through the cast, less Crosby, has cooperated since the 2002 component film "Star Trek Nemesis", despite the fact that the performing artists did not meet when they recorded their talking parts. Counting Crosby, the last time that the whole cast cooperated was the 1990 scene "Yesterday's Enterprise". 

Wil Wheaton, who played Wesley Crusher on "", recorded his parts for the scene on September 20, 2007. Seth MacFarlane coordinated the chronicle sessions with the visitor stars. 

"Not All Dogs Go to Heaven" got a 4.8/7 Nielsen Rating. 

Ahsan Haque of "IGN" called the scene "shockingly reviving", saying the scenes with the "Star Trek" cast satisfied desires. He additionally discovered "Meg's voyage of looking for acknowledgment through religion" all around dealt with. Steve Heisler of "The A.V. Club" gave the scene a C grade, scrutinized "Not All Dogs Go to Heaven" as exhausting and equation based and expressed that the essayists "have no clue how to best utilize Meg".