SS Merion 

SS "Merion" was a sea liner worked in 1902 for the American Line, an auxiliary line of the International Mercantile Marine (IMM). She additionally cruised for the Red Star Line and the Dominion Line—both auxiliary lines of IMM—during her traveler vocation. After the flare-up of World War I she was purchased by the British Admiralty and changed over to fill in as a fake looking like the Royal Navy battlecruiser . In May 1915, while acting like "Tiger" in the Aegean Sea, "Merion" was sunk by the German submarine . 

"Merion" was worked by John Brown and Company of Clydebank, Scotland for the American Line, an auxiliary of the International Navigation Company, and propelled on 26 November 1901. The ship was long (among perpendiculars) and abeam. She had a gross register tonnage (GRT) of 11,621. The ship had twin screw propellers fueled by twin triple-extension steam motors, and, at top speed, could move . As manufactured, "Merion" had lodging for 150 second-and 1,700 second rate class travelers. "Merion" was named after a suburb of Philadelphia, PA, similar to her sister deliver, the "SS Haverford". The towns were home to Clement Griscom, Director of the International Navigation Company. 

Upon finishing, the ship was sanctioned to the Dominion Line, an auxiliary line of International Mercantile Marine (IMM) with which International Navigation had converged in 1902. The liner cruised for Dominion on her first journey on 8 March 1902 from Liverpool to Boston. Subsequent to finishing eleven voyages on that course, "Merion" was come back to the American Line in March 1903. The next month she started cruising on the Liverpool–Philadelphia course on which she cruised the majority of the remainder of her traveler vocation. She was quickly contracted to the Red Star Line in 1907 for one Antwerp–New York voyage. 

The liner had a few accidents amid her traveler vocation. On 2 March 1903, an article in "The Washington Post" announced that "Merion" had steered into the rocks not long after leaving Queenstown while on the way to Liverpool from Boston. The ship was liberated from her roost close Chicago Knoll by the rising tide, yet when she stalled out quick in nearly a similar spot. At press time, two British Admiralty pulls had been dispatched to free the ship. Exactly a year later, "Merion" crashed into the steamer "Group Grant" off Tuskar Rock on 30 March 1904 and was harmed. On 24 December 1912, "Merion" slammed into a tanker off the Delaware coast and continued harm which included two overflowed compartments. The ship was stranded beneath Cross Ledge, however was refloated and cleared a path under her very own capacity back to Philadelphia, subsequent to releasing her payload and travelers. 

After the episode of World War I in Europe, "Merion" was outfitted with four firearms for cautious purposes. "Merion" was the subject of a challenge by the German Consul at Philadelphia, when she docked at that port furnished with those weapons, counter to rules in regards to outfitted ships in impartial ports. The still-unbiased United States necessitated that the firearms be evacuated before they would permit "Merion" to cruise; her weapons were stowed belowdecks when she withdrew Philadelphia on 5 September 1914. "Merion"s last voyage on the Liverpool–Philadelphia course started on 31 October, after which she was sold to the British Admiralty. 

"Merion" was utilized as a major aspect of a program that hidden sea liners to take after Royal Navy capital boats. "Merion" was designed after the British battlecruiser and conveyed in the Mediterranean. For this obligation, the liner was outfitted with canvas-and-wood reproductions of "Tiger"s firearms, and her group needed to stow them at whatever point drawn closer by impartial boats. The ship was likewise over-burden with counterweight to make the ship ride lower in the water to coordinate the profile of the genuine "Tiger". 

On 29 May 1915, the German submarine , evidently enticed by the possibility of sinking a British battlecruiser, enabled five stacked transports to cruise past before propelling a torpedo assault on "Merion". One torpedo from "UB-8" struck the liner and detonated, sending a portion of the "bond and stones" utilized as balance into the air. Some of "Merion"s team that were thumped over the edge by the blast had the capacity to coast aground on adjacent Strati Island on remainders of the liner's bogus weapons. Regardless of being seriously over-burden, "Merion" did not promptly sink, staying above water over 24 hours before at last capitulating to the assault on 31 May. Four team were executed amid the. "Merion"s sinking.