Ike's Wee 

"Ike's Wee" is the fourth scene of the second period of the American energized TV arrangement "South Park". The eighteenth scene of the arrangement generally speaking, it originally circulated on Comedy Central in the United States on May 27, 1998. In the scene, school guide Mr. Mackey is terminated, and swings to drugs. In the mean time, the young men misjudge what circumcision involves, and attempt to spare Kyle's more youthful sibling Ike from his up and coming bris. 

The scene was composed and coordinated by arrangement co-maker Trey Parker. "Ike's Wee" mocks certain frames of mind towards medication clients, and investigates whether family must mean the individuals who are connected by blood. This scene presented Ike's backstory as a received Canadian youngster. "Ike's Wee" got positive reactions from faultfinders, who particularly adulated the scene for its contacting minutes. 

Mr. Mackey, the school advisor, is giving a medication and liquor counteractive action address to the class, underlining that smoking, drinking, cannabis, and LSD are terrible. He passes an example of cannabis around the class with the goal that the kids can get familiar with its smell, yet it is stayed away forever. Therefore, Mackey is terminated, and is later kicked out of his home, abandoning him destitute. A urgent Mackey yields to attempting maryjane one night in a rear way, and later, LSD. Before sufficiently long, Mr. Mackey turns into a medication bewildered hipster, and meets a female nonconformist, with whom he chooses to get hitched. While on special first night in India, Mr. Mackey is caught and taken into recovery. Mr. Mackey rises clean from recovery and is given his activity back. 

In the mean time, Kyle welcomes Stan, Cartman, and Kenny to his more youthful sibling Ike's bris. When they become familiar with what a bris is, and confound it as a gathering where they are going to evacuate his penis, Kyle endeavors to figure out how to conceal his sibling from his folks and the circumcision procedure. Kyle puts Ike on a train to Nebraska and makes an Ike-style doll out of meat bones trying to not excite his folks' doubts. This reverse discharges when the doll is eaten by a puppy, which prompts them to imagine that Ike is dead. It is at the memorial service that Kyle discovers that Ike isn't his organic sibling, yet was received from Canada because of the headstone including the Canadian banner. After finding this, Kyle chooses that Ike is never again his sibling. His folks are stunned after Kyle uncovers reality, and Ike is recovered from Nebraska. 

The day of the bris arrives, and Kyle is grounded for sending Ike away. At the point when the mohel touches base to play out the bris, Ike escapes to Kyle's room in dread. Seeing Ike in trouble and some old pictures prompts a difference in heart in Kyle, and he guards his sibling savagely before it is disclosed to him what a circumcision really is, so, all things considered Stan and Cartman choose they need to be circumcised as well. They watch the procedure; despite the fact that the young men go out quickly, Kyle is calmed to see Ike safe. 

"Ike's Wee" was composed and coordinated by arrangement co-maker Trey Parker. The scene where Mr. Mackey loses the weed cigarette in class was enlivened by a genuine occasion from Parker's life, where an instructor came into his class in seventh grade, and go around a lit bit of weed, which at that point vanished. Toward the start and end of the scene, there are scenes where the children copy Mr. Mackey's voice to him, while he is careless in regards to the way that he is being ridiculed. Parker and his colleagues used to do something very similar to their advocate in middle school, who was the reason for Mr. Mackey's character. Parker said that he was particularly glad for Chef's line, "There's a period and a spot for everything, and it's called school", which is something Parker has confidence in, noticing that in the event that he had a tyke, he would let him know: "Do anything you desire, simply hold up till school since you don't have a clue what the hell up this moment." Chef's sentence would later return in the season four scene "The Tooth Fairy Tats 2000". 

The scene presented Ike's backstory as a Canadian kid embraced by the Broflovskis. As far back as the common characters Terrance and Phillip were set up to be Canadians in the season one finale "Cartman's Mom Is a Dirty Slut", and the resulting season two debut "Terrance and Phillip in Not Without My Anus", every Canadian character on "South Park" have had the equivalent oversimplified configuration: having basic beady eyes and a floppy head made up of two parts. While Ike had been on the show since its first scene, the authors initially did not realize that he would have been Canadian; he was retroactively made one dependent on his visual likeness to Terrance and Phillip. Ike's backstory would assume an essential job in the film "", which includes an anecdotal American–Canadian war, just as in future scenes of the arrangement, for example, the season seven scene, "It's Christmas in Canada", in which Ike's organic guardians remove him from the Broflovskis and take him back to Canada. 

"Ike's Wee" highlights normal voice acting from arrangement makers Parker and Matt Stone for most characters, Mary Kay Bergman (credited as Shannen Cassidy) for female characters, and Isaac Hayes for Chef. Extra discourse was given by "South Park" sound designer Bruce Howell, while Ike's lines were articulated by Howell's then-5-year-old child Jesse. 

"Ike's Wee" brings up the issue of who truly can be viewed as one's family. At first, Kyle's verifiable thought is that family comprises of "those for whom we care that are connected by blood". In light of this review of family, he never again wants to help Ike when he discovers that they are not related by blood. As the story advances, Kyle questions his underlying convictions, and structures the scene's focal good by saying that "Family isn't about whose blood you have. It's about who you care about." Thus, Kyle's improved perspective on family incorporates his embraced sibling, however his companions too. Kyle's scrutinizing of his own ethics has been compared to taking part in the argumentative Socratic strategy for request. 

The subplot of "Ike's Wee" caricaturizes certain medication subcultures, just as medication use, and societal dispositions towards medication clients. The manner in which the scene depicts Mr. Mackey's absence of genuine learning about medication use and habit has been portrayed for instance of "South Park" caricaturizing left-wing governmental issues, when "they lead to the kind of lip service conflicting with an appropriate open society". 

Some portion of the scene rotates around the act of religious male circumcision in Judaism, and the related service called the "brit milah" or bris, and the young men's misconception of the convention. The young men trust that circumcision involves the cutting off of one's penis, which they allude to by the silly conversational term "small", with the exception of Cartman, who demands calling it "fire fighter". Cannabis is additionally alluded to by different names, including "weed", "grass", "pot", and "maryjane", in which Mr. Mackey continually articulates the letter "j" (as in "jam"), which makes Kyle misspeak the medication as "wed Jew wanna". 

Medication use is frequently depicted related to the flower child subculture, through nonconformist characters, for example, the two adolescents that offer LSD to Mackey, and the lady that he gets to know and in the end weds. Jimbo and Cartman both utilize the expression "flower child" derogatorily. Amid their contention, Jimbo reveals to Mackey that he should simply go to a Grateful Dead show, to which Mackey says he can't since Jerry Garcia is expired. On two events, the scene indicates people viewing "Teletubbies" while high on cannabis or in recovery. In his medication counteractive action discourse, Mackey claims that LSD was made popular by John Lennon and Paul McCartney, previous individuals from The Beatles. Both Lennon and McCartney are known to have tried different things with the medication. 

While strolling home, Mr. Mackey unsteadily sings the 1983 Pat Benatar tune "Love Is a Battlefield". Amid Ike's alleged burial service, a bagpipe player begins playing the Hebrew people tune "Hava Nagila". At the memorial services, the cleric utilizes the expression "Fiery debris to powder, residue to tidy", from the Anglican internment administration. At the point when the townspeople begin to hassle Mackey, one of them yells, "Presently we see what you and Homer Simpson share for all intents and purpose... Dope!". This references the acclaimed catchphrase from "The Simpsons", "D'oh!", which sounds like "dope", which means unlawful medications. At Kyle's home, Kyle's folks offer the young men a dish called "GaHekgafuga", which is certainly not a genuine dish. At the point when Mackey is in India, he is caught by individuals from The A-Team, and headed out in their van. Mackey is taken to recovery to the Betty Ford Clinic, which depends on a genuine medical clinic. 

A typical plot gadget is referenced, where a shoulder blessed messenger (speaks to inner voice) and a shoulder fiend (speaking to allurement) show up almost a character. This idea is caricature in the scene, as both the demon and the heavenly attendant propose to Mackey that he should drink the lager. At the point when Stan discloses to Kyle what he supposes a bris implies, a dolly zoom is utilized, which is an agitating filmmaking impact frequently used to demonstrate that a character is experiencing a noteworthy acknowledgment. The stimulating impacts of specific medications are depicted by various methods. While breathing in cannabis, the back street that Mr. Mackey is in all of a sudden turns extremely brilliant. Subsequent to taking LSD, Mackey's head expands like a mammoth inflatable, and afterward actually isolates from his body, and buoys away (the young men associate with Mackey by gazing toward his head as it coasts over them). 

In the scene where the young men are conversing with Chef, he leaves without responding to the young men's sexual inquiry, irately saying, "Hell, kids, for what reason do I generally need to be the one to disclose so much stuff to you. Approach your folks for once!". This is in reference to Chef's propensity to offer exhortation to the young men. While the youngsters are attempting to consider what is the most vital thing for a man, Cartman says "Ham?", to which Stan indignantly answers, "Actually no, not ham, you fat fuck!". This trade was utilized verbatim between similar characters in "The Spirit of Christmas", the 1995 short film that was the antecedent to "South Park". 

Two scenes went before "Ike's Wee" in the second period of the show. The scene planned for April 1, 1998 guaranteed to determine the cliffhanger consummation of the main season finale, "Cartman's Mom Is a Dirty Slut", in regards to the personality of Cartman's dad, yet was in truth an April Fools' Day joke: "Terrance and Phillip in Not Without My Anus", a whole scene spinning around the two title characters. The April 1 scene should be an irregular, with the remainder of the period beginning in May. Nonetheless, after overwhelmingly negative fan response, the scene settling the Cartman's dad storyline, "Cartman's Mom Is Still a Dirty Slut", was moved from its arranged May 20 air date to April 22. "Ike's Wee" at that point began a six-scene keep running of the period when it was communicated on Comedy Central in the United States on May 20, 1998. 

"Ike's Wee" was met with good audits. Faultfinders particularly commended the scene for its contacting minutes, interestingly with the rotten amusingness regularly utilized in the arrangement. In his survey of the scene in the "Chicago Tribune", Allan Johnson applauded the scene, particularly in examination with the initial two scenes of the period, believing it to be one of the better scenes of the arrangement. At the point when the arrangement achieved its 100th scene in 2003, a similar author likewise recorded "Ike's Wee" as one of the "best 10 scenes that have made a standout amongst the most provocative comedies on TV". A survey in the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette said that "n the middle of this potty-mouthed humor, there are minutes that are absolute contacting", and especially featured the completion of "Ike's Wee" for instance, clarifying that "all's well at last, and Kyle and the young men get familiar with an exercise about family esteems that even Dan Quayle would affirm of". In 2000, guests of the Comedy Central site picked "Ike's Wee" as their most loved scene amid a casting a ballot called ""South Park" e-Lections", held around the season of the United States presidential race that year. 

Mr. Mackey's line, "drugs are awful, m'kay?", has entered pop culture. The Eminem tune, "The Kids" (which is highlighted on the B-side of the single "The Way I Am" and the spotless variant of "The Marshall Mathers LP"), is specifically about medication use, and makes various references to "South Park" and impressions of the show's characters, including an impression of Mr. Mackey's voice and the redundancy of his line. The melody "Hip Hop Quotables" by Ludacris, from his collection "Chicken-n-Beer", likewise contains the line. In 2008, the line was referenced in the contradicting feeling of a judge, for a situation of the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit. Additionally, in a 2010 weed related court case at the Maryland Court of Appeals, Judge Clayton Greene, Jr. referenced the scene as he would see it, calling Mr. Mackey's words "undying". In 2011, amid a legal executive board of trustees catching wind of a maryjane related bill in Denver, Colorado, a delegate flaunted a potential bundling for consumable weed items. As indicated by a gathering called the Cannabis Therapy Institute, the name on the bundle, which bore the placeholder content, "Lawful and administratively endorsed explanation portraying that pot is terrible, M-alright", was a reference toward the "South Park" scene. 

"Ike's Wee" was discharged on VHS in April 1999, alongside the scene "Chickenlover", on a video titled "South Park: Volume 8". The scene saw its first DVD discharge in December 1999, on a circle called "South Park: Volume 4", which additionally included "Chickenlover", just as "Cartman's Mom Is a Dirty Slut" and "Cartman's Mom Is Still a Dirty Slut". "South Park: The Complete Second Season" was discharged on DVD on June 3, 2003. On these home discharges, "Ike's Wee" has a diverting presentation by arrangement co-makers Trey Parker and Matt Stone, who are playing music to the old in a retirement home. Scenes of season two have additionally been discharged carefully, on administrations, for example, Amazon Video, the iTunes Store, and Xbox Live Marketplace. Like most scenes of "South Park", "Ike's Wee" is accessible to look for nothing on the show's site, SouthParkStudios.com.