Ed Blake 

Edward James Blake (December 23, 1925 – April 15, 2009) was an American right-gave pitcher in Major League Baseball who played four seasons with the Cincinnati Reds and the Kansas City Athletics. In eight profession diversions, Blake pitched 8⅔ innings and had a 8.31 earned run normal (ERA). 

Subsequent to graduating secondary school in East St. Louis, Blake played in the homestead arrangement of the adjacent St. Louis Cardinals before enrolling in the military. He came back to baseball subsequent to being injured in the military administration, contributing the minors for a long time before making his real alliance debut for the Cincinnati Reds. He pitched for them on and off for a long time, at that point went through the following six years pitching for the Toronto Maple Leafs. His last significant association appearance was a spell with the Athletics in 1957, and after two years his expert baseball profession finished. After retirement he turned into a handyman, and kicked the bucket in 2009. 

Conceived in St. Louis, Missouri to Edward and Katherine Blake, he went to Central Catholic High School in East St. Louis, where he was a baseball colleague of Hank Bauer, and graduated in 1943. Blake pitched batting practice for the St. Louis Cardinals amid the 1943 World Series after his secondary school graduation, in what he viewed as the feature of his expert vocation. He marked with the Cardinals in 1944 and went through the season with three distinctive small time groups: the Columbus Red Birds of the American Association, the Allentown Cardinals of the Interstate League and the Mobile Bears of the Southern Association. 

After the 1944 season finished, Blake enrolled in the Army and battled with the 40th Infantry Division in the Pacific Theater of Operations. While in the Philippines, Blake was injured, and was out of activity for nine months as he recuperated. As the 1946 season started, he rejoined the Cardinals, presently completely recouped, and went through the season with the Columbus Cardinals. Blake began the season losing his initial three begins, however then won 13 straight and completed the season with a 16 wins, eight misfortunes, and a 3.51 earned run normal. In February 1947, Blake was among a gathering of 92 Cardinals players welcome to a supper for Cardinals small time players, where allegations with respect to Cardinals players being paid inadequately were raised and talked about. He spent the accompanying season playing for both Columbus groups, playing 29 diversions altogether and completing the season with a consolidated 4.46 ERA. Before the 1948 season started, Blake was elevated to the Rochester Red Wings of the International League. He had a 7–6 record and a 3.88 ERA in 34 diversions, seven of them begins. In 1949, Blake burned through the greater part of the period playing for Rochester. On August 9, 1949 he was exchanged by the Cardinals to the Cincinnati Reds in return for Mike Schultz, finishing his profession with the Cardinals. Blake completed the season with the Syracuse Chiefs and completed the season with a consolidated 5–4 record and a 4.78 ERA. 

Blake started the 1950 season with Syracuse Chiefs and burned through the majority of the period as a beginning pitcher rather than a reliever. He began in 23 recreations and completed the season with a 12–8 record and an ERA of 3.51. In 1951, Blake was considered to have a little opportunity to make the significant class program. In any case, Blake got his first taste of the significant associations that season. He made his real association debut on May 1, 1951 against the Philadelphia Phillies. Blake played three diversions amid his time on the Reds in 1951, and completed two of those amusements. He pitched four innings, permitting five runs and three grand slams, completing the season with an ERA of 11.25. While on the Reds in 1951, he was a piece of a Reds "warm up area association" driven by Jim Blackburn, which drew up a progression of hilarious solicitations including a smoking parlor and sandwiches between twofold headers. He burned through the majority of the 1951 season with the Columbus Red Birds, playing in 27 diversions for them. In 27 pitching appearances, 23 of them begins, Blake ran 7–15 with a 5.91 ERA. Regardless of the record, Blake drove the Red Birds in innings pitched and completed tied for second in wins, however he did likewise lead the group, which went 53–101, in misfortunes. 

Blake went through the greater part of 1952 with the Milwaukee Brewers of the American Association, yet he additionally pitched a couple of amusements for the Reds amid the 1952 Cincinnati Reds season. He contributed two amusements for the Reds in 1952, coming in to complete the two diversions for the Reds. He pitched three shutout innings, permitting three hits in these two amusements. Amid his time with the Brewers, he contributed 21 amusements. He began 19 of the 21 recreations, won ten and lost three, and had a 3.96 ERA. As the 1953 season started, Blake again had a stretch with Cincinnati, however burned through the majority of the period with the Indianapolis Indians. He contributed one diversion for the Reds on April 17, 1953 against the Milwaukee Brewers, permitting two earned keeps running on a hit and a stroll without getting a player out. Amid his time with the Indianapolis Indians, he contributed 29 diversions, and was the workhorse of the Indians' squad. He completed the season with a 14–7 record, a 3.76 ERA, and 208 innings pitched, and drove the group in wins, innings pitched, and beginning appearances. 

The 1953 season denoted Blake's last appearance with the Reds. On February 1, 1954, Blake was bought from the Reds by the Toronto Maple Leafs, an unaffiliated group of the American Association. He played for the Maple Leafs for a sum of six seasons, where he had a portion of his best proficient vocation seasons. In 1954, he collaborated with Connie Johnson to lead the Maple Leafs to a 97-57 record. He completed the 1954 season with a 15–9 record, a 3.92 ERA, 30 recreations began, and 209 innings pitched, driving the group in the last two classes. The accompanying season, he joined with Johnson and Jack Crimian to enable Toronto to win 94 recreations. On July 10, Blake was the principal pitcher in the International League to win 13 recreations when he beat the Columbus squad 7–4. He completed the season with 17 wins, 13 misfortunes, and a 3.94 ERA. In 1956, Blake was an individual from the "enormous three" for the Maple Leafs, alongside Don Johnson and International League Most Valuable Player Lynn Lovenguth. The three consolidated for 750 innings pitched and 57 complete recreations while frequently chipping away at two days' rest. He completed the season with 17 wins, 11 misfortunes, and a 2.61 ERA. He additionally drove the group in shutouts with six. 

Blake was drafted toward the finish of the 1956 season by the Kansas City Athletics in the standard 5 draft. The day in the wake of being drafted, the Athletics intended to incorporate him in an eight-player manage the Detroit Tigers including Virgil Trucks and others, yet his consideration in the exchange was vetoed by Commissioner Ford Frick, asserting his consideration was "against the soul of the draft." Blake was supplanted in the exchange by previous Toronto colleague Jack Crimian. While he burned through the majority of the 1957 season with Toronto, he had one last real alliance stretch with the Athletics, contributing two diversions in April. His 1957 spell in Toronto was not as fruitful as past seasons, as he completed with eight successes, nine misfortunes, and a 5.54 ERA. He went through five weeks of the 1958 season unfit to play because of damage. Regardless of this, he was as yet ready to contribute 23 diversions, winning nine and bringing his ERA down to 3.54. In 1959, Blake split time among Toronto and the Houston Buffs, winning three amusements and losing ten in his last proficient period of baseball. 

After his playing profession finished, Blake proceeded to turn into a handyman. He went through almost 50 years in the pipes business and was once in the past the leader of Plumbers Local 360. Blake was hitched to his significant other, Carol Jean, for a long time before her demise. With Carol, he had a child, Ed, and a little girl, Peggy. His child, likewise named Ed Blake, was a previous pitcher who played in the Baltimore Orioles' homestead framework from 1970 to 1973, playing for the AA subsidiary Asheville Orioles at the pinnacle of his profession. His grandson, Ed Blake III, has proceeded in the strides of his dad and granddad as a pitcher in secondary school. Blake passed on in Swansea, Illinois at 83 years old after a long disease, and is buried at Mount Carmel Cemetery in Belleville, Illinois.