Consumes, Baby Burns 

"Consumes, Baby Burns" is the fourth scene of "The Simpsons"<nowiki>'</nowiki> eighth season. It initially broadcast on the Fox arrange in the United States on November 17, 1996. Mr. Consumes' missing child Larry returns and in spite of the fact that they at first get along well, Mr. Consumes starts to see that his child has ended up being a brute. It was coordinated by Jim Reardon and was the principal scene composed by Ian Maxtone-Graham. It visitor featured Rodney Dangerfield as Larry Burns. 

Mr. Consumes and Smithers return a train to Springfield in the wake of going to the yearly Harvard-Yale football match-up. The train makes a startling stop and a man named Larry comes up to the train and attempts to sell stock. He sees Mr. Consumes and takes out an old image of a man who appears to be comparative and looks at the two. All of a sudden the train pulls away, deserting Larry. In the interim, the Simpson family are en route home from visiting a juice plant and see Larry catching a ride. After much exchange, the family grabs the drifter. Larry gets some information about Mr. Consumes and they consent to take Larry to his home. In Springfield, Larry visits Mr. Consumes' domain and uncovers that he is Burns' child. 

Mr. Consumes is at first stunned, however subsequent to recognizing the similarity concedes that Larry was the result of a one-night remain with the little girl of a previous fire at a school gathering. At first, Mr. Consumes is excited to have a child and attempts to shape Larry after himself. Consumes takes Larry to extravagant gatherings and attempts to have him taken a crack at Yale, yet Larry continues acting like a brute and turns out to be a humiliation. Larry is given something to do in Sector 7G at the Springfield Nuclear Power Plant close by Homer and the two become companions. Larry welcomes Homer to supper, and at supper, Mr. Consumes moves toward becoming baffled because of Larry's rudeness and discloses to him that he wishes he had no child. Homer attempts to persuade Larry to counterfeit a capturing with the goal that Burns will concede that he adores his child, and in spite of the fact that Larry at first contradicts the thought, he in the end consents to do it and moves into the Simpsons' storm cellar. Homer calls Mr. Consumes and says that he can have Larry back in the event that he concedes that he adores him. Marge finds the arrangement and persuades Homer and Larry to surrender their plot, yet as they go out, they are spotted. 

The two are pursued into a film where they move out onto the marquee and have a short standoff with the police. Homer gives a sincere discourse to legitimize Larry's activities and Mr. Consumes pardons them for the scam, however clarifies he can't be the family whom Larry needs. Larry comprehends and declares that he has a spouse and kids back home who are most likely agonizing over him. Consumes and Larry state their farewells and the general population of Springfield party outside the film. 

Ian Maxtone-Graham composed the scene and it was his first composition credit for "The Simpsons", in spite of the fact that he had filled in as a specialist on the show for a while. Maxtone-Graham had recently worked with showrunners Bill Oakley and Josh Weinstein on an amusement appear and the two had needed to enlist him as an essayist on "The Simpsons". The scene began as a tale about Mr. Consumes and Grampa both being positioned in Paris amid World War II and becoming hopelessly enamored with a similar lady, who had an adoration youngster. Maxtone-Graham had needed this scene to be about Burns having a kid, which is the place it went. The other scene thought progressed toward becoming 'Seething Abe Simpson and His Grumbling Grandson in "The Curse of the Flying Hellfish"', which disclosed in the past season. The scene opens with the family visiting Mt. Swartzwelder Historic Cider Mill (a reference to individual author John Swartzwelder) on the grounds that the scholars had needed to accomplish something including harvest time and a juice factory appeared to be a decent setting for that. 

Rodney Dangerfield visitor stars in this scene and was an immense most loved of huge numbers of the show's journalists. Huge numbers of the jokes in the scene were explicitly composed to be "Dangerfield jokes", which were a lot harder to compose than the staff had initially thought. Dangerfield made a couple of key changes to his content amid the chronicle of his part; Weinstein kept the commented on content and pen and considers them among his three most prized "The Simpsons" assets. Structuring Larry Burns was a test in light of the fact that the executive had needed him to look like Dangerfield yet at the same time have Burns' attributes, for example, the pointed nose. 

The title of the scene is a reference to a line in the Trammps tune "Disco Inferno" ("Burn, child, copy.") After finding that Larry Burns is additionally working in Sector 7G, Homer quickly tidies up and secures an as a rule gathered jigsaw perplex which has a picture of Snoopy the pooch lying on his doghouse. The riddle is feeling the loss of a few pieces over where Snoopy's nose ought to be, which was purposefully attracted that approach to keep away from copyright laws. The character from Yale that Mr. Consumes quickly converses with depends on the anecdotal character Dink Stover from the book "Dink Stover at Yale" by Owen Johnson. The scene contains a few references to the film "Caddyshack" in which Dangerfield stars, for example, the scene where Larry endeavors to fit in with Mr. Consumes' partners. The last road party, which includes the tune "Any Way You Want It" by Journey, likewise spoofs the way that few movies, including "Caddyshack", end. The scene closes at a cinema, which is a reference to a few well known offenders who were included with theaters, for example, John Dillinger, Lee Harvey Oswald, and John Wilkes Booth. 

In its unique communicate, "Consumes, Baby Burns" completed 64th in appraisals for the seven day stretch of November 11–17, 1996, with a Nielsen rating of 7.7, identical to around 7.5 million survey families. It was the fourth-most elevated evaluated appear on the Fox organize that week, following "The X-Files", "Melrose Place", and "Beverly Hills, 90210". 

The writers of the book "I Can't Believe It's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide", Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood, called it "A fun scene, with Rodney Dangerfield putting a great deal of poignancy into Larry – and Homer's energetic discourse on the film at the peak is one of his most entertaining minutes."