2009 Football League Two play-off Final 

The 2009 Football League Two play-off Final was a football coordinate played at Wembley Stadium on 23 May 2009, toward the finish of the 2008–09 season. The match decided the fourth and last group to pick up advancement from League Two, the fourth level of the English football alliance framework, and included Gillingham, who completed fifth amid the class season, and Shrewsbury Town, who completed seventh. 

The match was Gillingham's first appearance at the new Wembley Stadium and Shrewsbury's second. The groups achieved the last by crushing Rochdale and Bury individually in the semi-finals. The match stayed scoreless until the latest possible time, when Simeon Jackson headed in Josh Wright's corner kick to give Gillingham the lead with seconds remaining. The Kent-based club accordingly won advancement back to League one year in the wake of being consigned. 

Gillingham had completed the 2008–09 season in fifth spot in League Two with 75, two spots and six above Shrewsbury. In the play-off semi-finals, the "Gills" confronted Rochdale, who had completed in 6th position. The main leg at Rochdale's Spotland Stadium on 7 May 2009 completed in a 0–0 draw. In the second match at Priestfield Stadium three days after the fact, Simeon Jackson scored from an Andy Barcham cross to give Gillingham the lead in the thirteenth moment, just for Chris Dagnall to even out in the 36th moment. Jackson scored a second objective with an extra shot in the 58th moment after John Nutter had been fouled by Rory McArdle. Gillingham hence won the match 2–1 and won their semi-last on total by a similar score. 

Shrewsbury, who had fit the bill for the play-offs by vanquishing Dagenham and Redbridge in the last match of the customary season, played fourth set Bury in their semi-last. The principal coordinate at Shrewsbury's home ground, New Meadow, was chosen by a late claim objective from Shrewsbury's Neil Ashton, who incidentally hurled the ball over his own goalkeeper Luke Daniels to give Bury a 1–0 success. In the second leg at Gigg Lane, Daniels spared Phil Jevons' extra shot and Shrewsbury's Kevin McIntyre scored an objective in the 88th moment to level the tie. With no further score, a punishment shoot-out was required to choose which group would progress to the last. Daniels spared extra shots from Andy Bishop and Danny Racchi and Shrewsbury won the shoot-out and in this manner achieved the last. 

The two groups were vieing for advancement to League One, the third level of the English football association framework. The match was Gillingham's first appearance at the new Wembley Stadium, despite the fact that the club had played at the first Wembley in 1999 and 2000. Shrewsbury had recently played at the new Wembley in the 2007 League Two play-off last and at the first in the last of the 1996 Football League Trophy. The participation of 53,706 was essentially higher than the 35,715 enrolled at the earlier year's League Two play-off last. A particular income figure for the match was not made open, yet 50% of the entryway receipts went to The Football League to convey among its part clubs, with Gillingham and Shrewsbury each accepting twenty-five percent and no extra transmission expense. Gillingham administrator Mark Stimson named a similar eleven players who had begun the second leg of the semi-last against Rochdale, while his contrary number Paul Simpson rolled out two improvements from the group which challenged the second leg of the semi-last against Bury, supplanting David Worrall and Omer Riza with Chris Humphrey and Nick Chadwick. 

In no time before commencement, sports wagering association Sky Bet gave indistinguishable chances of 6/4 on the two groups to win, with 9/4 on a draw. The match ref was Clive Oliver, whose child Michael assumed responsibility for the League One play-off Final the next day. This was the first occasion when that a dad and child had refereed in Football League play-off finals. Pre-coordinate stimulation included groups from Killamarsh Junior School and Thurlby Community Primary School challenging the last of the Football Association Community Cup, a motorcade by individuals from the British military, and an execution of the National Anthem driven by operatic vocalist Will Martin. 

The early piece of the amusement was generally uneventful, with the two groups' guards looking agitated. In the principal minute Gillingham's skipper Barry Fuller was compelled to hack the ball clear of his objective region after disarray among his colleagues. Gillingham started to assume responsibility for the diversion, yet the main genuine goalscoring opportunity did not come until the 31st moment when John Nutter shot for objective after a corner kick, just to be denied by Shrewsbury goalkeeper Luke Daniels. Josh Wright and Dennis Oli both had goalscoring chances obstructed by Shrewsbury's protectors and Daniels additionally spared a shot from Wright. Shrewsbury attempted to keep ownership of the ball and had few endeavors on objective before the half-time break. 

The second half started with Gillingham commanding play, and Andy Barcham had a goalbound shot tipped away by goalkeeper Daniels. Before long a while later, Gillingham goalkeeper Simon Royce made his first critical spare of the match, preventing a shot from Shrewsbury's Ben Davies, which denoted the beginning of a spell of weight from the "Wenches". Kelvin Langmead's shot was spared by Royce and Kevin McIntyre headed wide of the objective when given what Sky Sports' Richard Bailey thought about the best chance of the amusement. 

In the last moment of the amusement, Barcham tussled with a Shrewsbury protector and the ref granted a corner kick to Gillingham. Josh Wright took the corner and Simeon Jackson headed the ball into the objective to give Gillingham the lead. Protector Neil Ashton, remaining on the objective line, endeavored to keep the ball out yet was fruitless. Shrewsbury propelled a last-jettison assault in an offer to even out, yet commander Graham Coughlan's header went over the crossbar and Gillingham clutched guarantee triumph and restore advancement to League one year subsequent to being consigned from that division. 

Post-coordinate examination demonstrated that official Oliver had mistakenly granted the corner kick from which Gillingham's objective had been scored, as the ball had in actuality fallen off Barcham and hence an objective kick ought to rather have been granted to Shrewsbury. Paul Simpson alluded to this in his post-coordinate remarks, yet said that "on the off chance that we see things like that we will grip at straws". Imprint Stimson featured the money related advantages of his group's advancement, noticing that vast groups would be normal for matches in League One against Leeds United, Norwich City and Southampton. 

After the match, Gillingham commander Barry Fuller got the victors' trophy from the introduction party, which comprised of Lord Mawhinney, the executive of The Football League, and Mark Osikoya, Head of Marketing Assets for the League's backers, Coca-Cola. After two days, the club organized a celebratory open-top transport march from Rochester Castle to Priestfield Stadium.