Kendrick Moxon 

Kendrick Lichty Moxon is an American Scientology official and a lawyer with the law office Moxon and Kobrin. He rehearses in Los Angeles, California, and is a lead counsel for the Church of Scientology. Moxon got a B.A. from American University in 1972, and a J.D. degree from George Mason University in 1981. He was admitted to the Washington, D.C. bar relationship in 1984, and the State Bar of California in 1987. Moxon's initial work for the Church of Scientology included legitimate issues, and he additionally held the title of "reverend". He worked out of the Scientology knowledge office known as the Guardian's Office (GO), and was named as a unindicted co-plotter after the Federal Bureau of Investigation's examination concerning crimes by Scientology agents called "Activity Snow White". A proof stipulation for the situation marked by the two gatherings expressed he had given false penmanship tests to the FBI; Moxon has since said that he didn't "intentionally supply" false penmanship tests. 

The greater part of Moxon's lawful work is Scientology-related. He has filled in as Commissioner of the Scientology-associated association Citizens Commission on Human Rights (CCHR). He spoke to the Church of Scientology in 1988 out of a billion-dollar legal claim against the association by previous Scientologists which was expelled in Los Angeles Superior Court. In 1990 Moxon spoke to the association in a suit against the Internal Revenue Service trying to access data about Scientology held by the IRS. He helped 50 Scientologists in documenting separate claims against the association Cult Awareness Network (CAN), which prompted the liquidation of the association. He spoke to the offended party in the Jason Scott argument against CAN and clique deprogrammer Rick Ross. 

A Scientology production said Moxon had utilized church convention in cutting down CAN. Its benefits were purchased in insolvency court by a Scientologist and legitimate partner of Moxon's. Moxon said he was pleased with what he had done, alluding to the old CAN association as an "abhor gathering". Moxon spoke to the supervisor of the Scientology office Golden Era Productions in a documenting against Keith Henson, a faultfinder of Scientology. Moxon documented a sworn statement in 2000 for the situation including the criminal indictment of the Church of Scientology in the passing of Scientologist Lisa McPherson, and protected her treatment by Scientology staff members as a major aspect of a religious practice. 

Moxon was conceived in Pennsylvania. He moved on from American University in 1972 with a B.A. degree in Anthropology. He got his J.D. degree from George Mason University in 1981. He was admitted to the bar of Washington, D.C. on September 6, 1984, and the State Bar of California on June 17, 1987. 

In 1979, Moxon and Carla Smith had a little girl, Stacy Grove Meyer. Meyer passed on June 25, 2000 after she tumbled off a stepping stool and was shocked in the wake of contacting a 7,200-volt wire while working at Golden Era Productions. Brilliant Era Productions was refered to by the California Division of Occupational Safety and Health for ill-advised wiring precautionary measures close to a vault where Grove Meyer had been working. The California Occupational Safety and Health Administration examined the occurrence, and confirmed that her demise was not identified with the wellbeing infringement at the office. Forest Meyer had labored for a long time at Golden Era Productions in arranging and upkeep. 

In 1977, Moxon filled in as an authority of the Church of Scientology, and held the title of "reverend". His job inside the association in 1977 was designated "Executive of the Ministry of Legal Affairs of the Founding Church of Scientology". Alongside Scientology author L. Ron Hubbard and nineteen different Scientologists, Moxon was named as a unindicted co-schemer after the Federal Bureau of Investigation's examination concerning crimes by Scientology agents called "Activity Snow White". At the season of the arraignments and examination by the Federal Bureau of Investigation in the Operation Snow White case, Moxon was working in the congregation insight organization at that point known as the Guardian's Office (GO). Task Snow White was the name authored by Scientology organizer L. Ron Hubbard for a mission by the association's insight division to wrongfully acquire reports from the United States government. As a component of Operation Snow White, individuals from the Guardian's Office down and out into U.S. government workplaces including those of the Internal Revenue Service, so as to take archives identifying with Scientology. 

A 1979 stipulation of proof marked by authorities for Scientology expresses that Moxon gave false penmanship tests of GO usable Michael Meisner to the FBI. The two gatherings to the case were in understanding that Moxon reacted to an October 14, 1976 subpoena titled "Stupendous Jury subpoena for all unique known penmanship models of Michael Meisner and the work application and faculty records of Mr. Meisner in the ownership of the Church of Scientology" by giving "counterfeit penmanship tests in lieu of Mr. Meisner's actual penmanship models" to the United States government. The stipulation expressed Moxon was "coordinated to supply the administration with phony penmanship tests". Nine Scientologists marked the stipulation as a major aspect of a request deal. As per a 1976 letter from the "Locale of Columbia Security Office" of the Guardian's Office, "Rick Moxon" and four different people had either "full information or practically every last bit of it", about clandestine tasks against the United States government. As per the Guardian's Office letter, Moxon was counteracted under punishment of a US$50,000 fine from revealing his insight into the congregation spread activities. The non-revelation understanding was titled "Contract of Non-Disclosure; 'Doomsday Agreement'". The letter told an authority for the Church of Scientology to train Moxon "on the off chance that they do talk, at that point they will be removed everlastingly, bothered by the GO [Guardian Office] until doomsday, and left to spoil in the Physical Universe". 

Moxon expressed to the "Phoenix New Times" that the stipulation of proof was composed by FBI operators and marked by chapel authorities. He stated that he didn't "purposely supply" tests of false penmanship to the FBI, and said that he was examined by bar relationship for California and Washington, D.C. before being admitted to the individual bar affiliations. As per the "Phoenix New Times", Moxon is "on favorable terms" with both bar affiliations. Previous church knowledge employable Frank Oliver told the "Phoenix New Times" that in his work for the substitution to the Guardian's Office, the Office of Special Affairs, his last task for the association was to help Moxon in setting up an uncommon unit concentrated on the Cult Awareness Network. Oliver expressed that the objective of his work with Moxon was to enroll people who might move toward becoming offended parties in claims against the Cult Awareness Network. 

Moxon went about as lawyer for the Church of Scientology in 1988 when previous Scientologists sued the association in a billion-dollar legal claim. As indicated by Moxon the previous Scientologists incorporated a few individuals who were liable to banishment, and they mentioned the arrival of gifts they had made to the association, just as installment for time taking a shot at its sake. The case was rejected by a Los Angeles Superior Court judge, and Moxon portrayed the offended parties as "a couple of previous individuals who obviously united together to make a fiscal executing". 

In 1990 Moxon spoke to the Church of Scientology in a claim against the Internal Revenue Service trying to access government reports on the association. "The moves made by the IRS for this situation are commonplace of the office's harassive treatment of religious gatherings," said Moxon in an announcement in "The Fresno Bee". Amid the Church of Scientology's fight with the IRS, Moxon's law office contracted private specialists to research the administration office. Private examiner Michael L. Shomers said he set up a spurious activity called "Washington News Bureau", acted like a correspondent, and endeavored to gathering material on Scientology faultfinders. Shomers additionally said he penetrated IRS meetings in endeavors to gather information on IRS representatives that may have been skipping arrangements, drinking or having illicit relationships. Shomers said he was either paid in real money or by checks from Moxon's firm Bowles and Moxon. As indicated by "The New York Times", Moxon said Shomers' exercises were lawful, and that he and other Scientology lawyers utilized private specialists to counter deceptions from "rebel government operators". 

Moxon helped Scientologists in documenting 50 claims against the Cult Awareness Network (CAN), which in the long run prompted the chapter 11 of the association. Moxon affirmed to the "St. Petersburg Times" that his firm helped the Scientologists with their case against CAN for the most part no charge, and that Scientology temples "helped somewhat, however next to no" with the case. Moxon affirmed that his lawful administrations were mentioned by individual Scientologists on account of his religious segregation case involvement. "These were documented by [individual] Scientologists who were exploited by CAN. That’s the bottom line," said Moxon. Moxon expressed to "an hour" "They didn't- - they didn't jump up fortunately. Various Scientologists went to our firm and stated, 'I'm being victimized by CAN.'" 

Jason Scott of the Life Tabernacle Church in Bellevue, Washington was taken from his home in 1991 and exposed to "deprogramming". Deprogrammer Rick Ross had been alluded to Scott's mom by a neighborhood volunteer for CAN, and Moxon spoke to Scott in a claim against Ross and CAN. Moxon took on Jason Scott's case "expert bono". As indicated by an "hour" report on Scientology's activities against the Cult Awareness Network, two oaths utilized by Moxon for the situation were false. Scott won a jury judgment of US$5 million including $1.8 million against CAN, and CAN later looked into going chapter 11. After the CAN association was acquired in liquidation court by a Scientology lawyer, Scott terminated Moxon and enlisted Graham Berry, a Los Angeles legal counselor who had recently spoken to customers in suits against the Church of Scientology. Scott and Ross settled in 1996 for $5,000 and 200 hours of time from Ross for his intercession administrations. 

Scott expressed that he believed he had been controlled as a component of the Church of Scientology's arrangement to annihilate CAN. As per the "Chicago Tribune", Scott and his relatives felt Moxon was not giving enough consideration to Scott's budgetary judgment, and was rather centered around an "individual feud" against CAN. "Fundamentally, Jason said he was burnt out on being the notice kid for the Scientologists. My child has never been an individual from the Church of Scientology. When he was drawn closer by Moxon, he was tricked by his guarantees of a $1 million settlement, so he put it all on the line," said Scott's mom Katherine Tonkin in an announcement to the "Chicago Tribune". 

After Scott terminated Moxon, Moxon documented crisis movements in two states and claimed Scott had been affected by supporters of CAN to procure Berry as his legal counselor. "He's truly been mishandled by CAN and disgustingly manhandled by this person Berry," said Moxon in an announcement in "The Washington Post". Moxon, who had contended for the situation that Ross and partners had obstructed a capable grown-up's opportunity to settle on his own religious choices, promptly documented court papers looking to repeal the settlement and name a watchman for Scott, whom he called "weakened." That exertion fizzled. Jason Scott expressed he believed he had been a "pawn" in Scientology's "entire diversion". 

Moxon was engaged with the clearance of CAN's classified documents when the association was in chapter 11 procedures. People that had trusted in the earlier form of the CAN association communicated uneasiness about their secret records being sold to different gatherings, yet Moxon expressed: "Individuals who have carried out violations don't need them to be uncovered." Moxon's previous legitimate partner, Scientologist Steven Hayes, bought the advantages of the Cult Awareness Network in liquidation court. In 2000, Moxon co-composed a paper on the Cult Awareness Network with Anson D. Shupe and Susan E. Darnell. The paper, titled "CAN, We Hardly Knew Ye: Sex, Drugs, Deprogrammers' Kickbacks, and Corporate Crime in the (Old) Cult Awareness Network", was displayed at the 2000 gathering of the Society for the Scientific Study of Religion in Houston, Texas. The old "CAN never again exists since it was a loathe bunch that crushed families. I’m pleased with what I’ve done," said Moxon in an announcement in "The American Lawyer". 

As indicated by a Scientology distribution, Moxon used Scientology regulation to realize the destruction of the Cult Awareness Network. The production, wrote by Scientology official Kurt Weiland, expressed: "A common case was recorded by the unfortunate casualty against [Rick] Ross and the Cult Awareness Network. This time he had a lawyer who recognized what he was doing and gotten PTS/SP tech! The lawyer was a Scientologist and OT [Operating Thetan] Rick Moxon." "PTS/SP tech" is Scientology phrasing alluding to the association's organizer L. Ron Hubbard's endorsed strategies of taking care of foes called "suppressive people" (SPs) and their partners, called "potential inconvenience sources" (PTSs). The Cult Awareness Network was seen by Scientology as a "SP" association. 

Moxon spoke to supervisor Ken Hoden of the Church of Scientology's Golden Era Productions in February 1998 when he recorded a limiting request against Keith Henson after Henson challenged Scientology in May 1997 and January 1998 outside the Golden Era film studios in Gilman Hot Springs, California. Moxon had contended that Henson was unsafe dependent on remarks incredulous of Scientologists he had posted on the Internet, and his insight in the fields of cryonics and explosives. Hoden got an impermanent limiting request against Henson, yet the Riverside Superior Court judge would not make the controlling request perpetual. 

In 1999, Moxon spoke to individuals from the Seventh-day Adventists and Unification Church in a claim against a Maryland state team which was examining the impacts of religious factions on school grounds. The Unification Church and Seventh-day Adventists individuals guaranteed that their established rights were disregarded and depicted the "Team to Study the Effects of Cult Activities on Public Senior Higher Education Institutions" as a "religious examination". 

With individual Scientology lawyer Helena Kobrin, Moxon recorded a sworn statement in Pinellas-Pasco Circuit Court in March 2000, grumbling to the judge about the criminal indictment of the Church of Scientology identified with the demise of Lisa McPherson. They asserted that the indictment held an "extraordinary religious inclination" and an "extremist idea of a congregation". They safeguarded the act of the Scientology staff members that had kept Lisa McPherson at the Fort Harrison Hotel in Clearwater, Florida, declaring they had been associated with the "Contemplation Rundown", which they called a "totally religious" practice created by Scientology originator L. Ron Hubbard. They composed that "Driving a Scientologist to get mental administrations would resemble constraining an Orthodox Jew to eat pork or compelling a gave Catholic to have a fetus removal. It is essentially inadmissible and unimaginable to our religious confidence and still, small voice." Moxon said that the unjust passing claim recorded by individuals from McPherson's family against the Church of Scientology was "simply a vehicle to say awful things regarding the congregation". The criminal arraignment in the Lisa McPherson case was dropped because of issues with record-keeping by the restorative inspector; an unjust passing considerate suit was settled in 2004. 

As indicated by Scientology general insight Elliot Abelson, the greater part of Moxon's lawful work is Scientology-related. Notwithstanding his office with his law office, starting at 1997 Moxon additionally kept a lawful office in the Church of Scientology's central station at Hollywood, Los Angeles, California. Moxon has additionally filled in as lawful guide to the Scientology-subsidiary association Citizens Commission on Human Rights (CCHR). As indicated by a CCHR public statement from 2001, Moxon spoke to CCHR International as its Commissioner. 

In 2014, Moxon looked for discretion through the National Arbitration Forum to have the Internet area name, "KendrickMoxon.com", exchanged from Donald Myers to Moxon's proprietorship. Moxon effectively exhibited to the Forum authority that Myers "enlisted and utilized the area name in dishonesty", and Moxon's appeal was allowed. 

In 2013, Private Investigator Dwayne Powell was captured on obstacle and slinking charges identified with following Ron Miscavige. Amid the capture, police discovered guns and a custom made silencer. After his capture, Powell professed to have been paid $10,000 every week by Scientology through a middle person. As per the Los Angeles Times, Moxon's firm paid Powell $16,000 and kept Powell on the finance two years after his capture.