Nach dir, Herr, verlanget mich, BWV 150 

Numerous researchers believe that it might be the soonest surviving cantata by Bach, conceivably formed in Arnstadt in 1707. 

Bach's unique score is lost. The music gets by in a duplicate made by C F Penzel, one of Bach's last students, after the arranger's passing. The date of structure isn't referred to, and sources contrast regarding when and where Bach formed the work. Be that as it may, the parity of feeling has moved towards a date toward the start of Bach's profession. It isn't presently in question that it is one of Bach's soonest enduring cantatas. 

Proposals for the spot of arrangement have been: 

The Bach researcher Andreas Glăśckner contended in 1988 that the cantata may have been created in Arnstadt. The researcher Hans-Joachim Schulze recognized in 2010 a noteworthy acrostic in the finishing up four developments (which he portrayed in the 2010 "Bach-Jahrbuch", the diary of the Neue Bachgesellschaft). Altering for transposition blunders by the copyist, the underlying letters should spell DOKTOR CONRAD MECKBACH and conceivably in this way the work was formed to stamp this Măźhlhausen councilor's 70th birthday celebration in April 1707. On this premise the cantata may date from Bach's time in Arnstadt. Perhaps the cantata was heard half a month later after the finish of Lent, and hence it might have framed a test-piece for the Măźhlhausen arrangement, made in Arnstadt in view of Bach's supporter Meckbach. 

The cantata is, as John Eliot Gardiner notes, "for the most part acknowledged to be Bach's absolute first church cantata." Gardiner led in 2000 the Bach Cantata Pilgrimage and played out the cantata in the congregation for which it was then likely formed, at Bach's time called "Neue Kirche" (new church), presently the Johann-Sebastian-Bach-Kirche. 

The lyrics switches back and forth between scriptural refrains and free contemporary verse, which is normal in Bach's later cantatas, yet uncommon among his initial cantatas. The content of developments 2, 4, and 6 are chosen hymn sections, . The creator of the verse is obscure. Based on the content, it has been proposed that the work was composed for a penitential administration. 

The cantata was first distributed in 1884 in the Bach-Gesellschaft-Ausgabe, the primary release of Bach's finished works. The arranger Johannes Brahms, who served on the article leading body of the Bach-Gesellschaft-Ausgabe, checked out the cantata as it was being distributed. He utilized an adjusted variant of the bass line of the end chaconne for a work he finished in 1885, his Symphony No. 4. 

Bach organized the cantata in seven developments, an opening instrumental sinfonia and four choral developments mixed by just two arias. He scored it for four soloists (soprano, alto, tenor and bass), a four-section choir, and a little Baroque instrumental outfit of two violins (Vl), bassoon (obbligato) (Fg) and basso continuo. The span of the cantata is around 17 minutes. 

In the accompanying table of the developments, the scoring pursues the Neue Bach-Ausgabe. The keys and time marks are taken from Alfred Dăźrr, utilizing the image for basic time (4/4). The continuo, playing all through, isn't appeared. 

The work starts with a sinfonia and after that interchanges choral developments and arias. There are no recitatives, no da capo rehashes, and there is no chorale tune, curiously for Bach's cantatas. Bach utilizes choral fugues and imitative polyphony, frequently moving the rhythm and character of the music inside developments in all respects rapidly to oblige another melodic thought with each progressive expression of content. 

The sinfonia and the opening choral development are both dependent on the thought process of an octave jump pursued by five plummeting half advances. This chromatic figure, here and there named the "lamento bass" or passus duriusculus, has been used by arrangers as ahead of schedule as Monteverdi as a melodic portrayal of anguish, torment, and yearning. The sinfonia likewise presents topical material grew later in the work, utilizes lopsided expressing, and "a consistent progression of relentless song". 

The main melody on the start of Psalm 25, "" (Lord, I long for you. My God, I trust in you.), is "waywardly developed in spite of its relative quickness". It is wordy, underlining a plummeting chromatic scale theme. The musicologist Tadashi Isoyama takes note of "the graphically chromatic expressions of the opening sinfonia and the accompanying theme; these are suggestive of the enduring of the world". 

The accompanying soprano aria, "" (Yet I am and stay content), is likewise short however incorporates huge word painting. 

The fourth development, "" (Lead me in your Truth and show me), is another short and long winded theme, separated into four areas. 

Development five, "" (Cedars must, before the breezes, 

regularly feel much hardship), is one of just a bunch of vocal trios to be found in Bach's oeuvre, just as the main development in the cantata in all major. Isoyama states: "the continuo part drives the music forward with its expression portraying the preliminaries of the stormwinds". 

The penultimate development, "", highlights a "heavenly murkiness" of instruments as a major aspect of a mind boggling surface. It is in double structure and balances from D major through B minor to B major. 

The last development, "", is a chaconne, a structure which is ordinarily built over a rehashed ground bass. Bach utilizes a ground bass which is potentially an obtaining from Pachelbel. It is the reversal of the chromatic fourth ostinato from the opening development. Bach's arrangement incorporates strumming impacts which could be viewed as reviewing the root of the chaconne in Spanish guitar music. From a religious perspective, both the reversal of the lamento bass and the arrangement of adjustments in this development express in rococo melodic influence how Christ leads from distress to euphoria.