George Rogers Clark National Historical Park 

George Rogers Clark National Historical Park, situated in Vincennes, Indiana, on the banks of the Wabash River at what is accepted to be the site of Fort Sackville, is a United States National Historical Park. President Calvin Coolidge approved an established commemoration and President Franklin D. Roosevelt committed the finished structure in 1936. 

On February 25, 1779, Lieutenant Colonel George Rogers Clark, more established sibling of William Clark, drove the catch of Fort Sackville and British Lt. Representative Henry Hamilton as a feature of the observed Illinois Campaign, which kept going from 1778 to 1779. The chivalrous walk of Clark's men from Kaskaskia on the Mississippi River in mid-winter and the ensuing triumph over the British stays a standout amongst the most vital accomplishments of the American Revolution. 

In 1966, Indiana exchanged the site to the National Park Service. Neighboring the remembrance is a guest focus which presents interpretive projects and shows. The inside is arranged on South second Street in Vincennes. The site is situated in the Vincennes Historic District. 

The remembrance is put at the trusted site of Fort Sackville; no archeological proof has appeared careful area, however it is without a doubt inside the recreation center's limits. The scene being celebrated denoted the best minute in General George Rogers Clark's life. He was sent by the province of Virginia to ensure its enthusiasm for the Old Northwest. His 1778-1779 crusade incorporated the establishing of Louisville, Kentucky and the catch of British strongholds in the lower Ohio and Mississippi valleys. Powers under Clark's direction had caught Fort Sackville months prior, yet when told that British powers under Henry Hamilton had retaken the fortress, Clark drove a urgent walk to retake the fortification again for the American reason, prevailing on February 25, 1779. This prompted the recently shaped United States asserting control of what might turn into the conditions of Ohio, Illinois, Indiana, Michigan, and Wisconsin in the 1783 Treaty of Paris. 

As Vincennes developed during the 1800s, it overran the site of Fort Sackville and its limits were lost. In 1905, the Daughters of the American Revolution put a stone marker on what they accepted was the area of the stronghold. In 1929, neighborhood inhabitants endeavored to honor the 150th commemoration of Clark's crusade. The territory of Indiana fabricated a commemoration to General Clark's triumph during the 1930s, with the help of the United States government; the different assets added up to $2,500,000. The commemoration was structured by New York engineer Frederic Charles Hirons and committed June 14, 1936, by President Franklin Roosevelt. In spite of the fact that the National Park Service in 1976 considered the completed dedication the "last real Classical style remembrance" built in the United States, the New York State Memorial to Theodore Roosevelt at the American Museum of Natural History by John Russell Pope was likewise finished in 1936, and Pope's Jefferson Memorial in Washington, D.C. was finished 1939-1943, are of a similar period. 

The commemoration building is a round stone structure encompassed by sixteen rock fluted Greek Doric segments in a peripteral corridor, topped with a saucer arch of glass boards and laying on a stylobate. The north and east corners have bathrooms and different upkeep rooms. With the exception of the support rooms, these element put dividers and roofs, marble covering, and terrazzo flooring. Guests enter the commemoration by climbing thirty stone strides in the northwest corner. The storm cellar is incomplete, with fluorescent lighting uncovering a roof and dividers of uncovered cement, and an earth floor. 

Other unmistakable highlights in the recreation center incorporate John Angel's stone statue of Francis Vigo, a landmark sitting above the Wabash River raised in 1934 that respects the Italian-American vendor who helped General Clark. The nearby grounds of the Basilica of St. Francis Xavier hold a 1934 by Albin Polasek respecting Father Pierre Gibault, another figure in the Revolutionary War. Raoul Josset planned the Lincoln Memorial Bridge over the Wabash River to compliment the dedication tastefully. It incorporates help carvings structured by a landmark by Nellie Walker on the Illinois side of the scaffold and praises the relocation of Abraham Lincoln. A solid floodwall that shields the commemoration and Vincennes from Wabash flooding is additionally planned in a complimentary Classical style. The grounds additionally hold a dedication to the officers from Knox County who served in World War I, a marker indicating where Clark's home office most likely remained amid his attack of Fort Sackville, and the first Daughters of the American Revolution remembrance, which has moved a few times because of development of the fundamental commemoration. 

Muralist Ezra Winter executed a progression of seven paintings for the structure. 

The recreation center was approved by the Act of July 23, 1966 (PL 89-517). This law (Appendix A) contains three arrangements. The primary approved the Secretary of the Interior to acknowledge from the State of Indiana, the gift of the Clark Memorial and encompassing justification for a national park. This was practiced inside one year of the law's authorization. The second arrangement allows the Secretary to go into helpful concurrences with the proprietors of other noteworthy properties in Vincennes which are related with George Rogers Clark and the Northwest Territory. Such properties would turn out to be a piece of the recreation center, and the Secretary could aid their safeguarding, reestablishment and elucidation. The third arrangement requires the Secretary to manage, secure, create and keep up the recreation center as per the arrangements of the demonstration of August 25, 1916, which set up the National Park Service. 

George Rogers Clark NHP was built up to honor the achievements of George Rogers Clark and the extension of the United States into the Northwest Territory; to celebrate this story and its hugeness to the American individuals; and to collaborate in the conservation, reestablishment and elucidation of the locales and structures in Vincennes related with this story. The recreation center likewise celebrates the activities of Father Pierre Gibault and Francis Vigo who agreed with Clark against the British. 

The recreation center is situated on the site of Fort Sackville which Clark caught from the British amid the American Revolution on February 25, 1779. The triumph broadened American land guarantees in the Ohio Valley and added to the United States obtaining of the Northwest Territory in the 1783 Treaty of Paris. No structures dating from the Revolution exist in the recreation center today. 

The verifiable topic spoken to by George Rogers Clark NHP is the "Upheaval, War in the Frontier," as per 1987 History and Prehistory in the National Park System and the National Historic Landmarks Program. 

August 9, 2008, George Rogers Clark National Historical Park shut for 13 months to finish a three-million-dollar redesign by Frontier Waterproofing, Inc out of Denton, Texas. Park Superintendent Dale Phillips stated, "This is an ideal reclamation venture, and is basically required for the long haul safeguarding of the Clark Memorial". The principle objective was to fix the seepage of the porch, which has spilled since the 1930s, and remodel the entrance steps. The landmark revived September 24, 2009, and was rededicated on October 3, 2009. The 2009 Spirit of Vincennes Rendezvous was not affected by the remodel. 

Work amid the remodel included destruction and establishment of new parapets and rustications; fix of divider splits; expulsion, brief stockpiling, and numbering of roughly 1,000 substantial rock clearing stones; establishment of new waterproofing on the current cement basic deck of the square and the landmarks stylobate; cleaning and fix of the rock stone, steps, and facade; establishment of another uncovered total solid strolling surface around the Monument court; and supplanting the current sprinkler framework and arranging components. This fixed issues originally recognized in a 1939 auxiliary examination. 

George Rogers Clark National Historical Park was regarded on an America the Beautiful Quarter speaking to Indiana in 2017.