Italian war vessel Leonardo da Vinci 

Leonardo da Vinci was one of three gunboats worked for the "Regia Marina" (Italian Royal Navy) in the mid 1910s. Finished just before the start of World War I, the ship saw no activity and was sunk by a magazine blast in 1916 with the loss of 248 officers and enrolled men. The Italians accused Austro-Hungarian saboteurs for her misfortune, yet it might have been incidental. "Leonardo da Vinci" was refloated in 1919 and plans were made to fix her. Budgetary limitations did not allow this and her mass was sold for scrap in 1923. 

"Leonardo da Vinci" was long at the waterline, and by and large. The ship had a light emission and a draft of . She dislodged at typical burden, and at profound burden. The "Conte di Cavour"- class gunboats had a total twofold base and their structure was subdivided by 23 longitudinal and transverse bulkheads. They had a team of 31 officers and 969 enrolled men. 

The ship's hardware comprised of four Parsons steam turbines, each driving one propeller shaft. Steam for the turbines was given by 20 Blechynden water-tube boilers, eight of which consumed oil and twelve of which consumed both fuel oil and coal. Intended to achieve a most extreme speed of from , "Leonardo da Vinci" neglected to achieve this objective on her ocean preliminaries, regardless of for the most part surpassing the appraised intensity of her turbines. The ship just made a most extreme speed of utilizing . The ship could store a limit of coal and of oil that gave her a scope of at , and at . 

"Leonardo da Vinci"s principle combat hardware comprised of thirteen 46-bore 305-millimeter firearms, in five weapon turrets. The turrets were masterminded all on the centerline, with a twin-firearm turret superfiring over a triple-weapon turret in fore and toward the back sets, and a third triple turret amidships. These were assigned "A", "B", "Q", "X", and "Y" from bow to stern. The turrets had a rise ability of −5/+20 degrees and the ship could convey 100 rounds for each firearm, in spite of the fact that 70 was the ordinary burden. Sources differ in regards to these weapons' execution, yet maritime history specialist Giorgio Giorgerini claims that they shot protective layer puncturing (AP) shots at the rate of one round every moment and that they had a gag speed of which gave a greatest scope of . 

The auxiliary weapon comprised of eighteen 50-gauge firearms mounted in casemates on the sides of the frame. These firearms could discourage to −−10 degrees and had a greatest height of +15 degrees; they had a rate of discharge of six shots for each moment. They could fire a high-unstable shot with a gag speed of to a most extreme separation of . The ship conveyed an aggregate of 3,600 rounds for them. For protection against torpedo vessels, "Leonardo da Vinci" conveyed fourteen 50-gauge firearms; thirteen of these could be mounted on the turret tops, yet they could be mounted in 30 unique positions, including some on the forecastle and upper decks. These weapons had a similar scope of rise as the auxiliary firearms, in spite of the fact that their rate of discharge was higher at 10 rounds for each moment. They terminated an AP shot with a gag speed of to a greatest separation of . The boats were additionally fitted with three submerged torpedo tubes, one on each broadside and the third in the stern. 

The "Conte di Cavour"- class ships had a total waterline defensive layer belt that was high; of this was beneath the waterline or more. It had a most extreme thickness of amidships, diminishing to towards the stern and towards the bow. The lower edge of this belt was a uniform in thickness. Over the principle belt was a strake of defensive layer thick that stretched out up to the lower edge of the primary deck. Over this strake was a more slender one, 130 millimeters thick, that reached out from the bow to 'X' turret. The upper strake of defensive layer secured the casemates and was thick. The boats had two heavily clad decks: the principle deck was thick in two layers on the level that expanded to on the slants that associated it to the primary belt. The second deck was thick, likewise in two layers. Fore and behind transverse bulkheads associated the protected belt to the decks. 

The frontal shield of the firearm turrets was in thickness with sides, and a rooftop and back. Their barbettes likewise had 230-millimeter defensive layer over the forecastle deck that decreased to between the forecastle and upper decks and 130 millimeters underneath the upper deck. The forward conning tower had dividers 280 millimeters thick; those of the toward the back conning tower were 180 millimeters thick. 

"Leonardo da Vinci", named after the craftsman and innovator, was worked by the Odero Shipbuilding Co., at their Sestri Ponente, Genoa shipyard. She was set down on 18 July 1910, propelled on 14 October 1911, and finished on 17 May 1914. The ship saw no battle amid the war and burned through the greater part of it at stay. Naval commander Paolo Thaon di Revel, the Italian maritime head of staff, trusted that Austro-Hungarian submarines and minelayers could work too adequately in the restricted waters of the Adriatic. The danger from these submerged weapons to his capital boats was unreasonably genuine for him to utilize the armada in a functioning way. Rather, Revel chose to execute a barricade at the generally more secure southern end of the Adriatic with the fight armada, while littler vessels, for example, MAS torpedo pontoons, directed assaults on Austro-Hungarian boats and establishments. In the interim, Revel's warships would be saved to go up against the Austro-Hungarian fight armada if it looked for a conclusive commitment. 

She upset in Taranto harbor, in of water, after an inward magazine blast the evening of 2/3 August 1916 while stacking ammo. Setbacks included 21 officers and 227 enrolled men. The consequent examination accused Austro-Hungarian saboteurs, yet temperamental force may well have been mindful. 

The "Regia Marina" needed to raise the ship and rejected beginning intends to devastate the disaster area with explosives. They eventually settled on an arrangement to make the ship's body impermeable and raise it utilizing packed air and boats. This necessitated the ship's coal, ammo, and firearm turrets be expelled or cut free, separately, by jumpers to diminish her weight. A further difficulty was that the biggest drydock in Taranto had a greatest profundity of just and the topsy turvy "Leonardo da Vinci" drew . This implied her pipes must be cut off too. 

The majority of this readiness required more than two years and the ship was refloated on 17 September 1919. A profound channel had been dug from her area to the drydock and she was moved there. An extraordinary wooden structure must be worked to help her, still modified, after the water in the drydock had been depleted. Her decks were not intended to deal with the burdens associated with her novel circumstance and must be fortified to withstand the heaviness of the structure and fundamental fixes were made in anticipation of correcting her. A profound spot in the harbor was dug for this errand and some of counterweight were included spots determined to aid the correcting exertion. The essential work was finished by of water siphoned into the ship's starboard side and she was effectively corrected on 24 January 1921. The "Regia Marina" wanted to modernize "Leonardo da Vinci" by supplanting her middle turret with six AA weapons, in any case came up short on the assets to do as such and sold her for scrap on 22 March 1923.