These Words 

"These Words" (otherwise called "These Words (I Love You, I Love You)") is a tune by Natasha Bedingfield. It was composed by Steve Kipner, , Wayne Wilkins and Bedingfield for her 2004 introduction collection, "Unwritten". The tune is the collection's opening track, and was discharged as its second single. "These Words" subtleties Bedingfield's absence of motivation and her response to weight from her record mark to create a hit tune. 

"These Words" was discharged as the collection's second worldwide single and as the lead single in North America. The single sold well, achieved the main forty around the world, and topped the diagrams in both Ireland and the United Kingdom. It was ensured platinum in the United States and Australia, and was selected for "Best British Single" at the 2005 BRIT Awards. The melody was very generally welcomed by music pundits, and was every now and again refered to as a feature of the collection. 

Bedingfield started recording her introduction collection in mid-2003, after the marking of an account contract with Sony BMG prior that year. She was resolved not to be molded into "some music business categorize" and needed to compose tunes that were "natural, unique and genuine". Bedingfield started working together with Steve Kipner, Andrew Frampton and Wayne Wilkins in London and Los Angeles, yet their sessions were to a great extent useless because of Bedingfield's temporarily uncooperative mind and the weight that she felt to deliver a hit tune. Baffled, she started to sing "I adore you, I cherish you, I adore you" again and again. She was "confounded and simply needed to state what I implied in a straightforward manner, without utilizing every one of those elegant words." The line that Bedingfield sang out of dissatisfaction turned into the melody's snare and its topic motivated by her genuine trouble composing an adoration tune. 

"These Words" was commonly very generally welcomed by contemporary popular music commentators. PlayLouder's Daniel Robson portrayed the tune as a "convincing piece of popply bliss", while Allmusic composed that the track was "close immaculate" and combined "the rhythms and kinds of hip-jump and R&B with special tunes and Bedingfield's vocal certainty". The BBC considered it an "exemplary love tune" with an "extremely snappy tune", and remarked that it was deserving of achieving number one on the UK singles outline. Josh Timmermann of "Stylus Magazine" called it "best single so far this year", and David Welsh of musicOMH.com composed that the melody had a "virally-irresistible theme and (generally) cunning pleasantry." 

"Stylus Magazine" Colin Cooper positioned "These Words" at number thirteen on his rundown of the Top 20 Singles of 2004 and About.com positioned the tune at number five on its rundown of the Top 10 Most Memorable Pop Song Lyrics 2005. The site composed that Bedingfield's naming of the well known artists George Byron, Percy Bysshe Shelley, and John Keats in the melody empowers the audience to "nearly hear the great verse over a drum machine" as Bedingfield sings. 

Bedingfield's error of "overstatement" as "hyperbowl" has been routinely brought up consistently, incorporating into "The Guardian" ten years after the melody's discharge. 

"These Words" entered the UK Singles Chart on 22 August 2004 at number one, staying on the graph for thirteen weeks. It kept up the main position for about fourteen days. In the United Kingdom, Bedingfield and her sibling, pop-vocalist Daniel Bedingfield, turned into the main sister and sibling to accomplish separate number one singles. The track additionally graphed at number one in Ireland, staying on the singles outline for seventeen weeks. 

Crosswise over Europe, "These Words" was generally effective, achieving number one in Poland, number two in Austria, Germany and Norway, and the best ten in the Netherlands, Sweden and Switzerland. Somewhere else, the melody crested inside the main ten on most of the outlines it entered. In Australia, "These Words" appeared at number six and achieved a pinnacle position of number five three weeks after the fact. On the 2004 ARIA year's end outline, the melody diagrammed at number forty-nine and was affirmed gold. In New Zealand the single performed more grounded, achieving number two on the singles graph. 

"These Words" performed tolerably well in North America. The single appeared at number one hundred on the "Announcement" Hot 100 on 2 July 2005 and achieved a pinnacle position at number seventeen, staying on the outline for twenty weeks. The tune did well on pop-situated outlines, achieving number nine on the Pop 100 and number ten on the Top 40 Mainstream. "These Words" was helped on the Hot 100 by its solid computerized downloads, cresting at number seven on the Hot Digital Songs outline. The single had hybrid accomplishment in the move diagrams, achieving number one on the Hot Dance Airplay outline and number thirty-five on the Hot Dance Club Play graph. 

Two music recordings were created for the worldwide and North American markets. 

The tune's global music video was coordinated by Scott Lyon and Sophie Muller and debuted in August 2004. The video includes a few successions. It opens with Bedingfield sitting at a table in her Spanish manor, in Măąlaga, disappointed by her failure to discover motivation to compose a tune. A short time later, there are different scenes which incorporate her strolling and moving through the manor in brilliant outfits, sitting by the pool, lying on the shoreline and being encompassed by moving seats, moving radios, moving books in the library, and numerous forms of herself on a couch. The video finishes up with Bedingfield writing in her journal on the top of her manor. Her scribblings lead her sweetheart to her home where she goes to the overhang, letting him know "I cherish you, is that alright?". 

Amid each arrangement of the video, Natasha is wearing distinctive outfits and hair styles, with the main consistent being that she is in every case shoeless. 

The North American music video was coordinated by Chris Milk and recorded in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil in March 2005. The music video, be that as it may, was disposed of by the record name, however this form won four Annual MVPA Awards. The video starts with Bedingfield awakening alongside a boombox, dressing, brushing her teeth and abandoning her home with the boombox. While performing on Copacabana shoreline, she kicks her boombox, which wakes up and starts to move, and she leaves the shoreline and strolls down the road. The video finishes up with Bedingfield touching base back home to a house brimming with moving boomboxes in the room. 

A substitute rendition of the North American video was coordinated by Jim Gable utilizing a great part of the recording from the first. The boomboxes highlighted in the video are enlivened to look like illustrations and an act by Bedingfield in a live with streaming white drapery has been included. The video appeared in June 2005 and demonstrated fruitful on US video graph programs. It appeared on MTV's "All out Request Live" on 28 June 2005 at number ten and stayed on the program for a sum of six days. VH1 positioned the video at number twenty-two on its Top 40 Videos of 2005 commencement. 

The accompanying individuals added to "These Words". 

<br>