Broken World (Millennium) 

"'Broken World" is the twentieth scene of the main period of the American wrongdoing spine chiller TV arrangement "Thousand years". It debuted on the Fox arrange on May 2, 1997. The scene was composed by Robert Moresco and Patrick Harbinson, and coordinated by Winrich Kolbe. "Broken World" included visitor appearances by Ingrid Kavelaars, Donnelly Rhodes and Jo Anderson. 

Thousand years Group specialist Frank Black (Lance Henriksen) goes to North Dakota to find a prospering sequential executioner who has advanced from destroying steeds to assaulting and murdering individuals. 

"Broken World" highlighted the last directorial exertion for the arrangement by Kolbe, and the last content composed by Moresco; in any case, Harbinson would come back to compose further scenes in later seasons. The scene has been contrasted with Peter Shaffer's 1973 play "Equus", and got a Genesis Award from the Humane Society of the United States in 1998. 

In Bowman, North Dakota, a steady hand named Sally Dumont (Ingrid Kavelaars) is assaulted and left oblivious after she finds a steed has been killed in its slow down. Private examination association the Millennium Group send guilty party profiler Frank Black (Lance Henriksen) to explore, as twenty-one ponies have been executed in a similar way in the course of recent years in the region. Dark trusts the offender is in the beginning periods of forming into an explicitly spurred sequential executioner. Examining the stables, "help" is discovered written in human blood, while semen is found close where the steed was slaughtered. Dark finishes up the executioner is battling with the new sentiments of having assaulted an individual and not a creature. 

The killer—Willi Borgsen (Van Quattro)—is next observed assaulting pigs in a trailer utilizing a steers goad. Borgsen is hailed by the pigs' proprietor, and reacts by turning the cows goad on him. The injured individual's body is later found in a close-by shrubbery. Dark looks at the scene, deciding from the bootprints and proof of the steers push being utilized that the executioner works in a slaughterhouse. 

Another human injured individual is later found on a ranch, nearby another dead steed. The expression "thank you" is smeared on an adjacent divider. The North Dakota police set up an unknown telephone number to request for data, which Borgsen uses to insult Black by depicting the delight he gets from slaughtering. Dark counsels with a veterinarian, Claudia Vaughan (Jo Anderson), about the case, and discovers that the zone is home to a Premarin farm—estrogen for pharmaceutical use is gotten from the pee of female horses which are kept pregnant, their foals executed for meat to be sent out. Dark feels the executioner may have been raised on one of these homesteads. 

Borgsen contacts Black once more, admitting that his most recent executing has not fulfilled him. Dark cautions that his urges will just develop, and will never be fulfilled again. At the point when Borgsen hangs up, Black reasons that Vaughan is to be the following unfortunate casualty. Dark, individual Group part Peter Watts (Terry O'Quinn) and Sheriff Falkner (John Dennis Johnston) track the seized Vaughan to an equine slaughterhouse. Falkner is assaulted and debilitated by Borgsen as Black finds an as yet living Vaughan, who has been hung by her coat from a meat snare. Dark is then stood up to by Borgsen, who thumps him down with the dairy cattle goad. Borgsen is going to execute Black with a hostage jolt gun, however is trampled to death by a few got away steeds. 

"Broken World" was composed by Robert Moresco and Patrick Harbinson. Moresco had recently stated "Contract" prior in the main season, and furthermore went about as a maker amid the arrangement's run. Harbinson, making his first commitment to the arrangement with this scene, would later pen a further four scenes in the third season—"Via Dolorosa", "Darwin's Eye", "The Sound of Snow" and "Through a Glass Darkly". "Broken World" additionally denoted the last scene of "Thousand years" helmed by executive Winrich Kolbe, who had recently chipped away at "Groan", "Power Majeure" and "Life hereafter". 

Amid creation, "Broken World" was rather set to be titled "Equus", which is Latin for "horse" and was likewise the title of a 1973 play by Peter Shaffer concerning a young fellow with vicious sexual desires towards steeds. The scene opens with a statement from Friedrich Nietzsche's 1883–1885 treatise "Along these lines Spoke Zarathustra"—"Man is the cruelest creature". Visitor star Donnelly Rhodes, who depicted Peter Dumont, would later show up in the third season scene "...Thirteen Years Later" in an inconsequential job. 

"Broken World" was first communicated on the Fox Network on May 2, 1997. The scene earned a Nielsen rating of 6.8 amid its unique communicate, implying that of family units in the United States saw the scene. This spoke to 6.6 million family units, and left the scene the sixty-eighth most-saw communicate that week. 

The scene got blended surveys from faultfinders. "The A.V. Club" Todd VanDerWerff evaluated the scene a C, contrasting it with the principal demonstration of Shaffer's "Equus". VanDerWerff depicted the scene as "a flat, exhausting chaos that closes with a standout amongst the most crazy deux ex machinas I’ve found in a very long time", and felt that "the visitor cast is consistently poor", singling out Van Quattro as being "ludicrously terrible". Bill Gibron, composing for DVD Talk, appraised the scene 3 out of 5, calling it " exciting" however "not totally fruitful". Gibron felt that components of the setting were "extremely evil", however found the "staggering star horse mantras" of certain characters to be "senseless". Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson, in their book "Needing to Believe: A Critical Guide to The X-Files, Millennium and The Lone Gunmen", appraised "Broken World" three stars out of five, discovering it "excessively natural and too provisional to even consider making much effect". Shearman felt that the scene would have been exceptional set before in the arrangement's communicated request, yet by this phase in the principal season it had been "outgrown". 

"Broken World" got a Genesis Award in 1998, introduced by the Humane Society of the United States in the class "TV Dramatic Series".