The Beginning and the End (Millennium) 

"'The Beginning and the End" is the principal scene of the second period of the American wrongdoing spine chiller TV arrangement "Thousand years". It debuted on the Fox arrange on September 19, 1997. The scene was composed by Glen Morgan and James Wong, and coordinated by Thomas J. Wright. "The Beginning and the End" highlighted a visitor appearance by Doug Hutchison as the Polaroid Man. 

In this scene, Millennium Group profiler Frank Black (Lance Henriksen) must find the man who has captured his significant other Catherine (Megan Gallagher). Amid his chase, Group part Peter Watts (Terry O'Quinn) uncovers that the Group is significantly more cryptic and strange than Black had ever known. 

"The Beginning and the End" denotes the principal scene delivered with Morgan and Wong as co-official makers; their residency accountable for the arrangement would last the total of the second season. Visitor star Hutchison was a regular teammate with the scholars, having cooperated in a few different arrangement. The scene was seen by around 7.15 million family units in its unique communicate, and has gotten blended to positive audits from TV commentators. 

The scene starts in media res from the completion of the first scene, "Paper Dove", demonstrating Millennium Group part Frank Black (Lance Henriksen) returning via plane to Seattle with his significant other Catherine (Megan Gallagher) and little girl Jordan (Brittany Tiplady). As Black takes Jordan to their vehicle, Catherine is sedated and seized by a weird man (Doug Hutchison). The abductor—the Polaroid Man—hides Catherine in his vehicle and breaks with her to the mountains sitting above the city. 

Dark's individual Group individuals land to help, however he had not yet reached any of them. They set up barriers all through the city however are fruitless in discovering Catherine. Dark returns home, where his associate Peter Watts (Terry O'Quinn) enlightens him concerning attempting to consider a child with his better half. Watts had once been appointed to a kid murder case in which the dissected baby's body had been found in a cooler. He trusted that God would compensate him with his ached for child in the event that he could discover the killer—years later, he still just has his three little girls, which has made him understand you should forfeit one thing to increase another. Watts at that point has a Group part introduce programming on Black's PC, permitting him access to delicate documents—Black remarks that he thought he previously had full access previously. Watts likewise clarifies that the Group's enthusiasm for Black is the purpose behind the Polaroid Man's activities. Somewhere else, the Polaroid Man ties up Catherine in a dim room. 

Dark battles to discover anything valuable while exploring the snatching. In any case, he starts to encounter apparently mystic dreams which persuade she is being held in their previous home. The police assault the location however think that its vacant; Black finds a polaroid of another house inside. He can find the location of this house, however goes alone this time. Achieving it, he discovers Catherine in the storm cellar, bound to a beam. He goes to loosen her yet is blinded by a camera streak. He battles with the Polaroid Man, which we see through a progression of photos taken by the man's camera. Dark can wrest the Polaroid Man's blade far from him and cut him to death. 

Returning home, Catherine gathers a bag for Black, revealing to him that she can't have him in their home until further notice, trusting that he yielded a piece of himself in murdering her assailant. She trusts that time separated may enable him to recoup what he is missing inside; he takes the case and drives off. 

"The Beginning and the End" was composed by continuous partners Glen Morgan and James Wong, and coordinated by Thomas J. Wright. Wright had recently coordinated five scenes of the first season—"Dead Letters", "The Wild and the Innocent", "The Thin White Line", "Forces, Principalities, Thrones and Dominions" and "Paper Dove"—and would proceed to coordinate a further twenty scenes over the arrangement's run. Wright would likewise proceed to coordinate "Thousand years", the arrangement's hybrid scene with its sister show "The X-Files". The scene was the fourth to have been composed by Morgan and Wong, after "Dead Letters", "522666" and "The Thin White Line" in the primary season. The team would proceed to pen a further eleven scenes through the span of the second season, having played the jobs of co-official makers for the season. 

Doug Hutchison's character, acknowledged here as "Polaroid Man", had recently showed up in the principal season finale "Paper Dove". In that scene the character was credited as "The Figure", and been depicted by Paul Raskin. The character had been a nearness in the arrangement since "Pilot", yet had frequently just been implied without being seen. Hutchison had worked with Morgan and Wong a few times previously; they had initially met amid generation of "Crush", a scene of "Thousand years" sister show "The X-Files", and again on Morgan and Wong's brief arrangement "". 

Examining plans for the season, Morgan noticed that "the Millennium Group is an a lot further association" than found in the main season, including that "they're thinking about [Frank Black] for a possibility for the gathering (and) attempting to demonstrate to him that at the thousand years there will be an occasion - either flame and brimstone or consonant combination". Wong talked about how the character of Catherine Black, saying "there's an alternate connection among Frank and his family this season on account of the partition ... I believe that won't just bring some sort of ardent show however humor into it". The scene utilizes the Talking Heads tune "Life During Wartime", taken from their 1979 collection "Dread of Music". 

"The Beginning and the End" was first communicated on the Fox arrange on September 19, 1997. The scene earned a Nielsen rating of 7.3 amid its unique communicate, implying that of families in the United States saw the scene. This spoke to around family units, and left the scene the fifty-third most-saw communicate that week. 

The scene got blended to positive surveys from pundits. Composing for "The Buffalo News", Alan Pergament appraised the scene three stars out of five, portraying it as "ill humored" yet "jumbled and befuddling". Pergament noticed that "the anticipation of the debut really is improved by all the late spring theory about the future job of Gallagher", and felt that Morgan and Wong were "endeavoring to bring "Thousand years" into "X-File" an area". "The A.V. Club" Todd VanDerWerff appraised the scene an A−, finding that it enables the arrangement to "[turn] a corner, from a sequential executioner appear with recolored glass window hints, to a demonstrate that revels in those suggestions, a demonstrate that plays in age-old images with a chose taste of the strange". VanDerWerff additionally felt that a monolog conveyed by O'Quinn was a case of Morgan and Wong's best composition, and that the on-screen character's conveyance was the way to keeping the scene genuine in tone. Bill Gibron, composing for DVD Talk, evaluated the scene 4.5 out of 5, taking note of that it "begins Season 2 off in high style". Gibron found that the scene "has a decent feeling of interior experience to it, allowing us to get familiar with our fundamental players while setting the foundation for some guaranteed surreality to come". Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson, in their book "Needing to Believe: A Critical Guide to The X-Files, Millennium and The Lone Gunmen", evaluated "The Beginning and the End" over two stars out of five. Shearman felt that the scene had "an overwritten quality", refering to the Polaroid Man's exchange as the principle case of this; he additionally trusted that the advancement of Catherine Black as a character appeared to be shoddy, with the character sufficiently lacking profundity to "hold the group of onlookers' feelings".