Wide Open (Millennium) 

"Wide Open" is the ninth scene of the principal period of the American wrongdoing spine chiller TV arrangement "Thousand years". It debuted on Fox on January 3, 1997. The scene was composed by Charles D. Holland and coordinated by Jim Charleston. "Wide Open" highlighted visitor appearances by Glynn Turman and Roger Cross. 

Scientific profiler Frank Black (Lance Henriksen), an individual from the private insightful association Millennium Group, tracks a sequential executioner who covers up in his exploited people's homes and preys on the individuals who feel generally protected. 

"Wide Open" was Charleston's second, and Holland's just, commitment to the arrangement. The scene opens with a statement from the scriptural Book of Job, and makes reference to writer Patricia Highsmith. It got blended audits from commentators. 

A man, Cutter (Pablo Coffey), visits an open house seeing, where he is given a visit by the bequest operator, and appears to look into the room of a young lady. That night, the proprietors have returned home, and are settling down for the night when their girl, Patricia, starts shouting. Afterward, a security watch for the family's caution organization finds the assortments of the guardians hacked to death on the principal floor, however Patricia is no place to be seen. 

The Millennium Group, a private insightful gathering, dispatches profiler Frank Black (Lance Henriksen) to the scene, where he meets Seattle investigator Bob Bletcher (Bill Smitrovich). Dark finds the house's caution framework, seeing that it turned out poorly until the executioner went out. He finds that the executioner remained covered up in the house amid the review, rising that night to slaughter the family. In any case, Black likewise sees something close to an air vent; pulling it from the divider, he discovers Patricia, alive yet enormously irritated. 

Dark's better half Catherine (Megan Gallagher), a clinical social laborer, cautions against addressing Patricia — in spite of the fact that she is a critical observer, she is just a youngster and is in a delicate mental state. Dark and Bletcher visit James Glen (Glynn Turman) a graphology master, having discovered the executioner's mark in the review's guestbook. Investigation of the executioner's penmanship joins him to right around forty open house viewings over the past a half year. 

A bequest operator gets a video recording of the killings in the post, leaving Black confounded. That equivalent day, the executioner covers up in another open house, later killing a lady with a shotgun before calling the police to the scene. Dark finds a X attracted blood under the house's appreciated tangle; Patricia has started attracting red Xs her colored pencil pictures, which Catherine pays heed to. Dark surveys the tape, finding an impression of the executioner in a glass sheet. Separating an image from this, he demands to indicate it to Patricia, yet stops himself, understanding that the executioner let Patricia live with the goal that she could remember the occasions when addressed. 

Shaper, an intersection protect, conceals the shotgun in a dumpster, calling the police to report discovering it. The cop who takes his announcement later remembers him on observing the video. Dark has concluded the executioner's motives—he is attempting to undermine society's thought of wellbeing. Dark and Bletcher arrange a stakeout at another open house, recognizing Cutter when he arrives; nonetheless, Cutter getaways into the area. Dark understands that he has covered up in an adjacent house, where he and Bletcher discover the tenants tied up. Shaper ambushes Black, thumping him down, however before Cutter can get away, the family's pooch rushes at him, sending him falling over a mezzanine to his demise. Bletcher later discloses to Black that Cutter's auntie and uncle were tormented to death before him when he was a kid, which drove him to reproduce the torment for different families. 

"Wide Open" is the second of two scenes of "Thousand years" to be coordinated by James Charleston, who had additionally helmed the before first season scene "Blood Relatives". The scene additionally denoted the main commitment to the arrangement from author Charles D. Holland. 

Pablo Coffey, who depicted Cutter, the scene's sequential executioner, would later show up in "Manus Domini", a scene of "Thousand years" maker Chris Carter's arrangement "Unforgiving Realm". The scene highlights Glynn Turman as a graphologist, depicting the control in a misrepresented, "close clairvoyant" way; in spite of the fact that it had been depicted all the more sensibly in the second scene of the arrangement, "Gehenna". Bill Smitrovich, who plays repeating character Bob Bletcher, had recently depicted a graphologist in the 1986 film "Manhunter", which has been seen an impact on "Thousand years". 

The character of Patricia Highsmith—the young lady who endures the first attack—is named for the creator Patricia Highsmith, creator of "Outsiders on a Train" and the Tom Ripley arrangement of books. The scene opens with a citation from the Book of Job, one of the lovely books of the Ketuvim, the third piece of the Tanakh or Hebrew Bible. Another section from the Book of Job had been utilized in the opening of the scene "Dead Letters". Scriptural refrains were likewise utilized toward the start of different scenes in the arrangement, including the Book of Exodus in "The afterlife"; the Book of Jeremiah in "Weeds"; and the Gospel of Luke in "Blood Relatives". 

"Wide Open" was first communicated on the Fox Network on January 3, 1997; and earned a Nielsen rating of 6.9, implying that generally of all TV prepared family units were checked out the scene. The scene was viewed by around family units. 

"Wide Open" got blended audits from pundits. Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson, in their book "Needing to Believe: A Critical Guide to The X-Files, Millennium and The Lone Gunmen", evaluated the scene one-and-a-half stars out of five, finding that its virus open was "the most unmistakable thing about the entire case". Shearman and Pearson felt that the scene's executioner was unspectacular, remaining "generally mysterious"; and that his demise scene was "as weak a peak as he merits". Composing for "The A.V. Club", Zack Handlen evaluated the scene a B+, portraying it as "altogether agitating" and "strong stuff". Handlen felt that the treatment of the scene's miscreant was superior to most different portions of the arrangement, which "helps give the scene in general a more grounded feeling of direction". Nonetheless, it was felt that the character of Frank Black was still excessively ambiguous and indifferent, running over basically as "a conventional portrayal of Chris Carter's concept of courage". Bill Gibron, composing for DVD Talk, appraised "Wide Open" 3.5 out of 5. Gibron felt that the scene had "a shrewd reason, a lot of anticipation and some horrifyingly realistic symbolism", however reprimanded the "without any preparation" way in which the executioner's thought processes were clarified.