The Hand of St. Sebastian 

"The Hand of St. Sebastian" is the eighth scene of the second period of the American wrongdoing spine chiller TV arrangement "Thousand years". It initially broadcast on the Fox arrange on November 14, 1997. The scene was composed by Glen Morgan and James Wong, and coordinated by Thomas J. Wright. "The Hand of St. Sebastian" included a visitor appearance from C. C. H. Pounder. 

Thousand years Group guilty party profilers Frank Black (Lance Henriksen) and Peter Watts (Terry O'Quinn) travel to Germany to find a protected relic of Saint Sebastian, inadvertently finding splits inside the solidarity of the Group. 

"The Hand of St. Sebastian" was roused by Wong's investigation into Freemasonry and the Knights Templar; Wong needed to repeat the disharmony of these social orders inside the Millennium Group. The scene has gotten blended reactions from pundits, and was seen by roughly 6.7 percent of the accessible gathering of people in its underlying communicate. 

In 998, a priest is sold out by his comrade, and shot to death by toxophilite. As they look through his robe to discover their objective—the preserved hand of Saint Sebastian—they see a tattoo on the man's body; an ouroboros, image of the Millennium Group. 

In 1998, present day Group part Peter Watts (Terry O'Quinn) asks his associate Frank Black (Lance Henriksen) for help with a case the Group have not approved; he stays enigmatic regarding what it is. They travel to Germany to examine the homicide of a Dr. Schlossburg, whose lab is found to house an embalmed body. The two are captured by German police, yet when the police acknowledge they have secured individual specialists they guarantee collaboration. In any case, the pair discover that Schlossburg has just been incinerated; later they barely escape demise when their rental vehicle has been fixed with a vehicle bomb. 

Dark interfaces the endeavor on their lives to Schlossburg's homicide. He requests subtleties of the case from Watts, who clarifies that the mummy found before dates to early Christianity, when the Millennium Group initially assembled. Be that as it may, they understand they are being followed by two men, and come back to their lodging. There, they are met by Cheryl Andrews (C. C. H. Pounder), an individual Group part who has worked with them before. She offers her assistance yet Watts decays it. Watts is later ready to get to Schlossburg's PC records; in the mean time, the specialist is observed to be alive, recovering cognizance in an emergency clinic bed and telling police his attacker was Watts. 

Andrews reveals to Black she has been sent to avoid Watts acting outside the Group's transmit; she gives Black a contact number and leaves. Afterward, Black comes back to Schlossburg's lab and discovers Watts, who clarifies that a gallant request, the Knights Chroniclers, had the relic of Saint Sebastian at the turn of the second thousand years; the hand bestows information to its owner that will defeat the indecencies related with the turn of the thousand years. Watts uncovers that Schlossburg had revealed the request's cemetery. 

Dark and Watts discover that Schlossburg is alive and visit him; the specialist does not perceive Watts, however demands that his assailant recognized himself as "Dwindle Watts". He uncovers the areas of the cemetery, in a peat swamp. Dark and Watts leave to achieve it; Schlossburg is killed instantly a short time later by two professional killers. At the marsh, the pair discover a preserved cadaver grasping the relic; in any case, they have been trailed by the police, and Watts is captured for Schlossburg's homicide. Dark tracks down Andrews at the capacity building where the relic has been taken. They are trapped by the two professional killers, and amid their break, Black notices where the relic is covered up. Andrews promptly turns on Black; the trap was a trap to draw the data out of Black, while she had built occasions to utilize Watts as a fall man to ruin the Group. Nonetheless, the police can mediate, hearing everything and safeguarding Black. Afterward, Watts and Black investigation the relic, yet Black is persuaded that their own feelings will be more essential to them than otherworldly antiques. 

"The Hand of St. Sebastian" was composed by regular colleagues Glen Morgan and James Wong. It was the ninth scene to have been composed by the pair, who had written a few over the first and second seasons. The pair had additionally played the jobs of co-official makers for the season. "The Hand of St. Sebastian" was coordinated by Thomas J. Wright; Wright had coordinated eight scenes already and would steerage a further seventeen over the arrangement's run. Wright would likewise proceed to coordinate "Thousand years", the arrangement's hybrid scene with its sister show "The X-Files". 

The scene was driven by Wong's craving to compose a scene focussing on Watts, as he needed to feature O'Quinn as a performing artist. Wong additionally felt "that by uncovering that the Millennium Group had existed for quite a long time and setting the scene abroad, that would give the story more noteworthy degree and weight". The presentation of breaks inside the Group was motivated by Wong's examination into the Knights Templar and Freemasonry, as he considered these hidden associations to have reflected how he would have preferred to introduce the Group, and he felt each contained groups or reactionary components which he needed to reproduce. The scene includes the penultimate appearance by C. C. H. Pounder as pathologist Cheryl Andrews. Pounder depicted the character in four different scenes, showing up over each of the three seasons. 

"The Hand of St. Sebastian" was first communicated on the Fox organize on November 14, 1997. The scene earned a Nielsen rating of 6.7 amid its unique communicate, implying that of families in the United States saw the scene. This spoke to around families, and left the scene the eightieth most-saw communicate that week. 

"The Hand of St. Sebastian" has gotten blended reactions from pundits. "The A.V. Club" Todd VanDerWerff evaluated the scene a "B+", discovering it to contain an engaging blend of otherworldliness and secret activities. In any case, he considered the disclosure that Andrews was a turncoat inside the Group to befuddle, thinking that its hazy how a human miscreant could be characterized inside an arrangement previously utilizing devils and philosophical fiendishness. Bill Gibron, composing for DVD Talk, appraised the scene 4.5 out of 5, applauding the visitor exhibitions by Pounder and Hall. Gibron composed that the scene had a "highlight film" feel, and portrayed it as a standout amongst the best scenes of the period. 

In any case, Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson, in their book "Needing to Believe: A Critical Guide to The X-Files, Millennium and The Lone Gunmen", evaluated "The Hand of St. Sebastian" one star out of five. Shearman felt that by this point, the arrangement never again taken after what it had been in its past season, disparagingly contrasting it with the "Indiana Jones" film arrangement. He composed that Henriksen's depiction of Frank Black appeared "debilitated" in the scene, as the on-screen character had assembled a trustworthy and profound character who currently appeared to be totally not normal for his previous self.