Giveamanakick 

Giveamanakick—typeset as giveamanakick and shortened as GAMAK— were an Irish shake music pair from Limerick. The two band individuals were Stephen Ryan (Steveamanakick), the vocalist and guitarist, and Keith Lawler (Giveamanakeith), the drummer. 

Giveamanakick performed routinely in Ireland, visited the United Kingdom with The Undertones and furthermore performed in Germany amid their reality. The pair included at celebrations, for example, Electric Picnic, Indie-dubiousness and Hard Working Class Heroes and furthermore participated in the 2fm 2moro 2our. They discharged three collections; "Is it alright to be uproarious, Jesus?" (2003), "We Are the Way Forward" (2005) and "Welcome to the Cusp" (2008) preceding the end was reported in August 2009. 

Staying in Limerick all through the presence of Giveamanakick, the pair were announced "the best hard-musical crew in the nation" by shake commentator Eamon Sweeney and got the endorsement of "Hot Press", "No Disco"s Leagues O'Toole and Fight Like Apes. 

Giveamanakick framed in 2001 after the end of Tooth. Left with a few melodies, Ryan executed as a performance craftsman with an electric guitar. One night, he experienced Keith Lawler, who played guitar in another band at the time, and Lawler started drumming with Ryan. In 2002, the team discharged a split single with Mr. Creosote titled "Darko Filopovic", a tune which would later component as the last track on their introduction collection. By 2003, they had bolstered a few increasingly settled acts, including Yeah Yeahs and Rocket from the Crypt. In 2003, there were reports that the pair's introduction collection, titled "Is it alright to be noisy, Jesus?", would be discharged on a name called Larry Gogan Records yet this later developed to be a joke distributed by a juvenile "Foggy Notions". The team's presentation collection was in truth distributed on 3 July 2003 with that equivalent title by the autonomous mark Out On A Limb Records as the name's first discharge, with Giveamanakick having completed the process of account it in January that year. It got two out of five stars in an audit by RTÉ's Tom Grealis who expressed, "this is the thing that happens when crudeness comes with no genuine feeling of direction". The "Hot Press" analyst said tuning in to the collection was "something much the same as being battered round the head with a board of wood for thirty minutes" in any case, in any case, "grisly incredible". 

A second collection, "We Are the Way Forward", was recorded over an eight-day time span and discharged by Out On a Limb in 2005. It got three from five stars in a survey by RTÉ's Harry Guerin who stated: "you'll get what you paid for from their step and swing". Phil Udell's "Hot Press" survey gave the collection 4.5 out of five stars, saying it "gives you that much looked for after instinctive rush" and that the couple "composed it, recorded it, screwed off. A work of art". Their live exhibitions additionally came in for expanding basic recognition. At the point when Eamon Sweeney of the "Irish Independent" went to a show by The Presidents of the United States of America in May 2006, his audit expressed that they "were well and really brushed off the phase by the help band" who were Giveamanakick. Stephen Ryan has said in a few meetings that their initial Sunday morning execution at Electric Picnic in 2006 was "one to recall" with such a large number of celebration goers coming to see them. He portrayed the execution as" somewhat of a haze" as they "really confused by the response" and "playing with a portion of our melodic legends, for example, Dinosaur Jr. what's more, Deftones was a fantasy come through". 

In 2007, Giveamanakick visited Germany before starting to record their subsequent collection. They did the 2fm 2moro 2our with The Flaws and Messiah J and The Expert. In October that year, shake commentator Eamon Sweeney, wailing over the absence of unique Irish music that year, singled out Giveamanakick as " the best hard-musical crew in the nation" and said they "could show each one of those Dublin chancers with dumb hair styles and no thoughts some things". 

Giveamanakick were portrayed as a "promising demonstration" for 2008 by Eamon Sweeney of the "Irish Independent" in January of that year. They played out a few Irish dates in January that year. Their third collection, "Welcome to the Cusp", was recorded over a ten-day time span in Letterkenny, County Donegal and discharged on 2 May 2008 on the couple's very own mark, Monkeyheart Recordings. It got three from five stars in a survey by RTÉ's Harry Guerin who depicted the music as "quick and essential". Different distributions called it "the best Irish record of 2008". The track "Fragile Bones", discharged as the second single from the collection, denoted the principal utilization of an acoustic guitar by the team. Ryan guaranteed that "Welcome to the Cusp" was the collection which "most precisely speaks to what the Giveamanakick sound really is" and depicted the melodies as "perhaps the most basically testing ones up until this point". 

Giveamanakick played out an across the nation visit following the arrival of "Welcome to the Cusp", including a date at Indie-dubiousness in August 2008. Before their Friday night execution at Electric Picnic in 2008, Tony Clayton-Lea, writing in "The Irish Times", prescribed celebration goers to see them, commenting that "regardless of keeping a profile lower than a Dachshund's stomach, Giveamanakick have figured out how to keep things scoring along by goodness of their inborn tumultuousness and melodic glimmer blast pummel". 

In September 2008, Giveamanakick played Hard Working Class Heroes, at which the coordinators chose them close by acts, for example, The Blizzards and Heathers to play the CMJ Festival in New York City the next month. On 3 April 2009, the couple showed up on Phantom FM close by Royseven to perform spread renditions of Nirvana tunes. Giveamanakick's end accompanied a declaration on 17 August 2009. The last shows are booked to happen in Cork, Dublin, Galway and Limerick in November and December 2009.\\ 

In June 2013, it was reported that giveamanakick were to change for one night just to praise their name's tenth birthday celebration. 

The team were depicted as "clamor shake's rendition of The Odd Couple" by RTÉ. Ryan once depicted himself as a "Beastie Boys enthusiast" and the couple were contrasted with acts, for example, Pixies. His verses normally highlighted references to mainstream culture. Notwithstanding, the opening track on their introduction collection, titled "Ger Canning", was not a reference to the telecaster of a similar name. They kept in touch with self-portrayed pop melodies, where "Keith hits his drums actually hard and I [Steve Ryan] like my guitars turned up extremely boisterous yet we do this with a pop reasonableness", and utilized strategies, for example, utilizing gas covers to contort their vocals when playing live, performing with streamers and urging their group of onlookers to disorientate themselves by applauding their very own ears. They lived in Limerick all through their reality, refering to a positive music scene, the diversion and the heaving just like a portion of their explanations behind enjoying their home city. 

Stephen Ryan was the guitarist and vocalist. He is initially from Castletroy. He experienced childhood in a foundation of customary music, tuned in to The Beatles on his dad's turn table, figured out how to play the console at ten years old, the guitar at fifteen years old and joined a band called Tooth in his mid twenties. He has likewise executed as Windings. 

Keith Lawler was the drummer. He is from Parteen, Co. Clare. He enjoyed Nirvana when he was fourteen years old, and figured out how to play the guitar when he was a young person however started to become familiar with the drums at sixteen years old when he understood that there was an excess of guitarists in his general vicinity. Tooth used to practice close to his home and he frequently tuned in to them from outside. Two of his cousins were at that point drummers, having performed with The Charming and The Cranberries. 

Giveamanakick discharged three collections.