Bart the Murderer 

"Bart the Murderer" is the fourth scene of "The Simpsons"<nowiki>'</nowiki> third season. It initially publicized on the Fox arrange in the United States on October 10, 1991. In the scene, Bart unearths the Mafia bar, Legitimate Businessman's Social Club, in the wake of having a horrendous day at school. The proprietor of the bar, mobster Fat Tony, procures Bart to fill in as its barkeep. At the point when Principal Skinner disappears in the wake of rebuffing Bart in school, Bart is before long blamed for having him killed and is put on preliminary. As he is going to get indicted, Skinner arrives and clarifies that he was coincidentally caught in his carport all week, clearing Bart. 

The scene was composed by John Swartzwelder and coordinated by Rich Moore. Fat Tony (voiced by Joe Mantegna) and his colleagues, Legs and Louie, showed up on "The Simpsons". The scene highlights social references to tunes, for example, "Black magic" and "One Fine Day", and the American TV arrangement "MacGyver". Since airing, the scene has gotten generally positive surveys from TV commentators. It gained a Nielsen rating of 13.4 and was the most astounding appraised appear on the Fox organize the week it broadcast. 

In the wake of having an especially awful day at school through Santa's Little Helper eating his homework, Bart missing the transport and passing up what could have a great time field outing to the chocolate manufacturing plant since he neglected to bring his consent slip, Bart gets captured in a deluge and loses control of his skateboard. He crashes down the stairwell of the Legitimate Businessman's Social Club, a Mafia bar claimed by the Springfield Mafia. Fat Tony, the pioneer of the Mafia, and his partners in crime Legs and Louie are at first ungracious towards Bart, however they are awed by his capacity to pick the triumphant pony in a steed race on the radio. At the point when Bart makes up an amazing Manhattan mixed drink for the mobsters, Fat Tony contracts him as their barkeep and errand kid. As Bart receives increasingly more criminal like attributes, Marge becomes on edge and advises Homer to proceed to meet the Mafia, however Homer endorses of them after they let him succeed at poker. 

At the point when Fat Tony discovers Principal Skinner is giving Bart detainment after school, the mobsters go to go up against Skinner. The following day, Principal Skinner is missing and is ventured to have been killed. Bart has a bad dream of Principal Skinner's phantom and his own execution on the seat. He hurries to stand up to Fat Tony at the bar. At the point when the police burst in, Fat Tony accuses Principal Skinner's vanishing for Bart, who is put on preliminary. Amid the preliminary, Fat Tony, Legs, and Louie lie to the court, saying that Bart is Principal Skinner's killer and the pioneer of the Springfield Mafia. 

Judge Snyder is going to convict Bart when Skinner blasts through the entryways, tousled and bristly, and clarifies that neither Bart nor the mobsters attacked him. Or maybe, when Fat Tony and his cohorts had gone to his office docilely, Skinner had shouted at them to not meddle with understudy order, and they left timidly. After he came back to his home, he ended up caught underneath huge amounts of old papers in his carport, and was stuck there for over seven days, until he had the capacity to get away. Bart is found not guilty, notwithstanding the direction for the indictment fruitlessly attempting to persuade the Judge to strike Skinner's discourse from the record. Fat Tony discloses to Bart that he would not like to get him into any inconvenience for his sake, however Bart chooses to leave in the wake of discovering that "wrongdoing doesn't pay". 

The scene was composed by John Swartzwelder and coordinated by Rich Moore. The scholars imagined the possibility of the scene before the 1990 film "GoodFellas", which has a comparative plot, was discharged. After it was, the scholars fused references to the film into the scene. The character Fat Tony shows up on the show in this scene. He was designed according to the physical appearance of Paul Sorvino's character Paul Cicero in "GoodFellas". 

The scholars initially needed American on-screen character Sheldon Leonard to voice Fat Tony, however they were unfit to get him, so they ran with Joe Mantegna. Mantegna was offered the job amid the show's second season, and since he had seen the show previously and thought it was "amusing", he chose to give it a shot. He felt regarded that they approached him to complete a voice for the show. In a meeting with "The A.V. Club", Mantegna said he supposes he got the job because somewhat because of his execution in the 1990 Mafia film "The Godfather Part III", which opened only preceding when he got the job. He thought the content was shrewd and cunning and that he delighted in chronicle it. Mantegna has since seemed ordinarily on the show as Fat Tony, who turned into a common character; it is Mantegna's longest-running job in his acting profession. Mantegna remarked: "Who realized that Fat Tony was going to reverberate in the hearts and brains of the ["Simpsons" fans] out there? Clearly [the writers] got enough criticism about how the character was enjoyed that they composed it in over and over, and I was somewhat of a repetitive person that they’d tap into something like a few scenes a season." 

Legs and Louie, Fat Tony's partners in crime, additionally showed up in this scene. The character of Louie depended on American performer Joe Pesci, who is known for playing savage Mafia mobsters. Neil Patrick Harris visitor featured in the scene as himself, depicting Bart in "Blood on the Blackboard: The Bart Simpson Story", an unpleasantly erroneous made-for-TV film dependent on Bart's existence with the Mafia that the Simpson family watches toward the finish of the scene. 

The arrangement of Bart smashing down the stairwell to the Mafia bar is like a scene in the film "GoodFellas", in which a young man is utilized by a Mafia as their courier. The majority of the ponies in the race that Bart wagers on are named after a renowned vivified character's catchphrase: "Ain't I a Stinker?" (Bugs Bunny), "Yabba Dabba Doo" (Fred Flintstone), "Sufferin' Succotash" (Sylvester), "That is All Folks" (Porky Pig), "I Yam What I Yam" (Popeye), and Bart's catchphrases "Eat my shorts" and "Don't have a dairy animals". The Chiffons' melody "One Fine Day" is heard when Bart serves beverages to the mobsters amid a round of poker. The essayists initially needed to utilize the tune "Be My Baby" by The Ronettes for the scene, however they couldn't clear the copyrights for it. In his room, Bart stores the Springfield Mafia's loot—a truckload of containers of Laramie cigarettes. While swaggering around the kitchen, he sings Frank Sinatra's tune "Black magic". The scene in which Bart awakens shouting subsequent to having a bad dream about Skinner is a reference to a scene in the 1972 film "The Godfather", in which Jack Woltz shouts in the wake of awakening in bed and finding an executed steed head close by. Skinner liberates himself from being caught under the papers in a manner like the character Angus MacGyver's breaks in the American TV arrangement "MacGyver". 

In its unique American communicate, "Bart the Murderer" completed 31st in the evaluations for the seven day stretch of October 7–13, 1991, with a Nielsen rating of 13.4, comparable to roughly 12.5 million survey family units. It was the most elevated appraised appear on the Fox arrange that week. Since airing, the scene has gotten for the most part positive audits from TV commentators. John Orvted of "Vanity Fair" named it the eighth best scene of "The Simpsons" in light of the "roused" Mafia parody and on the grounds that it "goes further into Bart's progressing struggle with power figures." Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood, the writers of the book "I Can't Believe It's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide", commended the scene in which Skinner discloses his vanishing to the court, calling it Skinner's "best hour" on the show. Nate Meyers of Digitally Obsessed named the scene the best in the third season, and remarked that there are "numerous precious minutes" in it, for example, Homer's gathering with the Springfield Mafia. Meyers additionally applauded Swartzwelder's content. Bill Gibron of DVD Verdict remarked that how a scene that begins with Bart having an awful day can prompt him being striven for homicide as the leader of the neighborhood Mafia "is only one of the stunning landmarks to this present show's predominance." 

DVD Movie Guide's Colin Jacobson thought "Bart the Murderer" was season three's first "really incredible" scene since it "begins off solid and shows signs of improvement as it moves." Even however he supposes Mafia spoofs have been abused, Jacobson thought this one brought "a crisp methodology and remains reliably diverting. An incredible visitor spot from Mantegna makes a difference. It additionally feels like the main scene of this season truly propels the arrangement; it appears to be something somewhat more sharp than the vast majority of what preceded it." Andy Patrizio of IGN called "Bart the Murderer" his most loved of the period, and applauded the scene for its references to "The Godfather" and "MacGyver". The scene's reference to "GoodFellas" was named the 28th most prominent film reference in the historical backdrop of the show by "All out Film"<nowiki>'</nowiki>s Nathan Ditum.