Call My Name (Third Day tune) 

"Call My Name" is a melody recorded by the Christian musical crew Third Day. Composed by Mac Powell and created by Third Day, it was discharged as the lead single from the band's 2008 collection "Disclosure" through Essential Records. "Call My Name" has been viewed as a pop shake and "air conditioning benevolent" tune with an essential drum track and a "strong" tune. Melodiously, it has been on the other hand portrayed as being set from the point of view of God or being a shout out to God. 

"Call My Name" got positive gathering from faultfinders, some of whom commended the game plan of the melody. Third Day has played out the tune live and it has been secured by Australian nation vocalist Keith Urban. The melody was a hit on Christian radio, cresting on the "Bulletin" Hot Christian Songs and Hot Christian AC diagrams and the "Radio and Records" Christian AC Monitored, Christian AC Indicator and Christian CHR outlines. "Board" magazine positioned it second on the multi year-end Hot Christian Songs outline and third on the multi year-end Hot Christian AC diagram and at twenty-seventh on the decade-end Hot Christian Songs graph and at thirty-6th on the decade-end Hot Christian AC graph. 

"Call My Name" was one of the main tunes that Third Day dealt with in their composition session for "Disclosure" in Charlottesville, Virginia. The verses to the tune were composed by Mac Powell, while the music was formed by Third Day. It was delivered and customized by Howard Benson and recorded by Mike Plontikoff at Bay 7 Studios in Valley Village, Los Angeles and at Sparky Dark Studio in Calabasas, California. Pre-generation was taken care of at Haunted Hollow Studio in Charlottesville, Virginia by Rob Evans and Steve Miller, at Tree Sound Studios in Norcross, Georgia by Don McCollister, and at Sonica Recording in Atlanta, Georgia by Jon Briglevich. The tune was blended by Chris Lord-Alge at Resonate Music in Burbank, California and aced by Bob Ludwig at Gateway Mastering in Portland, Maine. Computerized altering was directed by Paul DeCarli, while sound building was taken care of by Ashburn Miller and Hatsukazu Inagaki. 

"Call My Name" is a melody that goes on for four minutes and two seconds. It was created utilizing regular time in the key of E major, with "driving rock" rhythm of 78 beats for every moment. Macintosh Powell's vocal range ranges from the low note of B to the high note of F. The verses to the tune have been depicted as being from the point of view of God, in spite of the fact that the individuals from Third Day have portrayed them in an unexpected way; David Carr, the drummer for Third Day, portrayed the verses as "shouting out to God and getting out his name", while Mac Powell portrayed them as "sort of a supplication. It's about when individuals are experiencing tough occasions and experiencing battles that we've gotta shout to somebody, and for us as individuals of confidence it's shouting to God and hearing his voice... also, for another person it could be a companion or a relative that you've gotta contact sort of assistance share those weights you experience". Carr additionally portrayed the drum part "Accessible as needs be My Name" as "fundamental", and the melody itself has been depicted as "pop shake", "air conditioning neighborly", and "pop". 

Basic gathering to "Call My Name" was sure, with certain commentators commending the course of action and vocals. Deborah Evans Price of "Board" magazine considered the single a "well-made number", while Matt Conner of "CCM Magazine" lauded the tune as "splendidly created". Russ Breimeier of "Christianity Today" viewed the tune as a "major AC-accommodating single" and applauded it as having "savvy snares, a solid song, and a portion of Powell's most great vocal work to date amid the end vamp, belting out notes I didn't realize he was prepared to do". John DiBiase of Jesus Freak Hideout called the tune "an unashamedly infectious pop shake song of praise that shockingly has a comparative melodious message to ['Cry Out to Jesus'], just exhibited from Christ's own point of view this time around". 

On the "Announcement" Hot Christian Songs outline, "Call My Name" appeared at No. 15 for the graph seven day stretch of 26 April 2008. It progressed to No. 8 in its fourth outlining week and to No. 3 in its 6th outlining week. In its eighth diagram week, "Call My Name" progressed to the top spot, holding the No. 1 spot for a sum of thirteen back to back weeks. The melody dropped to No. 3 in its twenty-first outline week, replaced from the top spot by Brandon Heath's "Give Me Your Eyes". In the wake of going through twenty-nine weeks on the graph, "Call My Name" dropped out. 

On the "Board" Hot Christian AC diagram, "Call My Name" went through eleven weeks at No. 1. It likewise beat the "Radio and Records" Christian AC Monitored and Christian AC Indicator graphs for eleven weeks each, and the "Radio and Records" Christian CHR diagram for about a month and a half. 

"Announcement" magazine positioned "Call My Name" second on their multi year-end Hot Christian Songs graph and third on their multi year-end Hot Christian AC outline. "Radio and Records" positioned it third on their multi year-end Christian AC Songs outline and fifth on their multi year-end Christian CHR tunes diagram. "Bulletin" magazine additionally positioned "Call My Name" twenty-seventh on their decade-end Hot Christian Songs outline and thirty-6th on their decade-end Hot Christian AC diagram. 

"Call My Name" has been highlighted on the accumulation collections "WOW Hits 2009" and "Well That's What I Call Faith", just as on Third Day's live CD/DVD "Live Revelations". Australian nation artist Keith Urban secured the tune, including it as a little something extra track on his 2009 collection "Resisting Gravity". 

Preceding the arrival of "Disclosure", Third Day performed "Call My Name" at a few of their shows on the Third Day LIVE Tour; specifically, the band played out the melody on 3 April 2008 at the Mid-Hudson Civic Center in Poughkeepsie, New York, where they were joined in front of an audience by Scotty Wilbanks. At the advantage show Nashville4Africa, hung on 4 April 2009 at the Schermerhorn Symphony Center in Nashville, Tennessee, the band played out the melody with individual Christian shake craftsmen Jars of Clay. On the 2010 Winter Jam visit, Third Day performed "Call My Name" as a feature of their set rundown on 28 and 30 January. 

Credits adjusted from the collection liner notes