Skirmish of Great Bridge 

The Battle of Great Bridge was battled December 9, 1775, in the zone of Great Bridge, Virginia, right off the bat in the American Revolutionary War. The triumph by provincial Virginia state army powers prompted the flight of Royal Governor Lord Dunmore and any residual remnants of British control over the Colony of Virginia amid the beginning of the contention. 

Following expanding political and military strains in mid 1775, both Dunmore and frontier rebel pioneers selected troops and occupied with a battle for accessible military supplies. The battle in the end concentrated on Norfolk, where Dunmore had taken asylum on board a Royal Navy vessel. Dunmore's powers had braced one side of a basic waterway crossing south of Norfolk at Great Bridge, while rebel powers had involved the opposite side. While trying to separate the dissident social occasion, Dunmore requested an assault over the scaffold, which was unequivocally spurned. Colonel William Woodford, the Virginia civilian army officer at the fight, portrayed it as "a second Bunker's Hill undertaking". 

Presently, Norfolk, at the time a Loyalist focus, was relinquished by Dunmore and the Tories, who fled to naval force dispatches in the harbor. Revolutionary involved Norfolk was crushed on January 1, 1776 out of an activity started by Dunmore and finished by agitator powers. 

Pressures in the British Colony of Virginia were brought up in April 1775 at generally a similar time that the threats of the American Revolutionary War broke out in the Province of Massachusetts Bay with the Battles of Lexington and Concord. John Murray, fourth Earl of Dunmore, the imperial legislative leader of Virginia, had expelled the pilgrim administrative get together, the House of Burgesses, who at that point built up a temporary get together in Virginia Conventions. The Burgesses approved existing and recently raised civilian army troops to arm themselves, prompting a battle for control of the settlement's military supplies. Compelled from Lord Dunmore, British powers expelled black powder from the frontier storage facility in the capital of Williamsburg, causing a showdown among illustrious and local army powers. In spite of the fact that the occurrence was settled without viciousness, Dunmore, dreading for his own wellbeing, left Williamsburg in June 1775 and set his family ready a Royal Navy dispatch. A little British armada at that point came to fruition at Norfolk, a port town whose traders had noteworthy Loyalist (Tory) propensities. The risk presented by the British armada may likewise have assumed a job in limiting Whig action in the town. 

Episodes proceeded between revolutionaries on one side and followers (Tories) on the other until October, when Dunmore had gained enough military help to start activities against the insubordinate homesteaders. General Thomas Gage, the British president for North America, had requested little separations of the fourteenth Regiment of Foot to Virginia in light of supplications by Dunmore for military help. These troops started attacking encompassing districts for agitator military supplies on October 12. This action proceeded through the finish of October, when a little British ship steered into the rocks and was caught by revolutionaries amid a clash close Hampton. Naval force vessels sent to rebuff the townspeople were repelled by pilgrim civilian army in a concise gunfight that brought about the murdering and catch of a few mariners. Dunmore responded to this occasion by issuing an announcement on November 7 in which he pronounced military law, and offered to free settler slaves in Virginia willing to serve in the British Army. The declaration frightened agitator and follower slaveholders alike, worried by furnished previous slaves and the potential loss of their property. By and by, Dunmore had the capacity to enlist enough captives to frame the Ethiopian Regiment, just as raising an organization of Tories he called the Queen's Own Loyal Virginia Regiment (later ingested into the Queen's Rangers in 1776). These neighborhood powers enhanced the two organizations of the fourteenth Foot, and notwithstanding the maritime powers, that were the bottom British military nearness in the province. This effective enrolling drive incited Dunmore to compose on November 30, 1775 that he would before long have the capacity to "lessen this province to an appropriate feeling of their obligation." 

Master Dunmore had, on landing in Norfolk, requested the fortress of the extension over the Elizabeth River, about south of Norfolk in the town of Great Bridge. The extension framed a characteristic guard point since it was on the main street driving south from Norfolk toward North Carolina, it was verged on the two sides by the Great Dismal Swamp, and the entrance to the scaffold on the two sides was by means of tight thoroughfares. Dunmore sent 25 men of the fourteenth Foot to the extension, where they raised a little stockade fortress they called Fort Murray on the Norfolk side of the scaffold. They additionally evacuated the extension planking to make crossing it increasingly troublesome. The fortress was equipped with two guns and a few littler swivel weapons. The men of the fourteenth were enlarged by little organizations from the Ethiopian and Queen's Own regiments, bringing the army size to somewhere in the range of 40 and 80 men. 

Because of Dunmore's decree, Virginia's get together arranged its local army troops to walk on Norfolk. William Woodford, the colonel driving the second Virginia Regiment, progressed toward the scaffold with his regiment of 400 and around 100 sharpshooters from the Culpeper Minutemen. On December 2 they touched base at the scaffold and set up a camp over the extension from the British fortress. Upon their entry the British start obliterating structures close to the stronghold to guarantee a reasonable field of flame. Woodford was at first reluctant to strike the British position, supposing he sufficiently needed guns to beat an excessively liberal gauge of the army's quality. He along these lines started digging in his position, while increasingly more volunteer army organizations landed from the encompassing areas and North Carolina. A few guns in the long run touched base with an unexpected of North Carolina men, however they were pointless on the grounds that they needed mountings and carriages. Woodford likewise ended up concerned when he heard bits of gossip that countless Highlanders had joined Dunmore's powers. The bits of gossip were mostly valid: the Highlanders were in truth 120 families, however few of the men were talented at arms. By December 8, the power in the civilian army camp had developed to almost 900, with in excess of 700 fit for obligation. 

Dunmore discovered that the provincial state army had gained guns, yet was ignorant they were inoperable. Worried for the security of the army, he chose an assault on their position was fundamental. His arrangement required a diversionary assault by the Ethiopian organizations of the army at a spot downriver from the extension to draw the volunteer army's consideration, while the battalion, fortified by extra troops from Norfolk, would assault over the scaffold in the early morning light. 

Dunmore's best knowledge had educated him that the agitator powers numbered around 400. On the night and morning of December 8 and 9 Captain Samuel Leslie drove fortifications down to Fort Murray, landing around 3:00 am. Upon his landing he discovered that the Ethiopian separation expected for the redirection was not in the post. They had been dispatched on a normal organization to another adjacent intersection, and Dunmore had neglected to send orders guaranteeing their accessibility for the activity. Leslie chose to continue with the assault at any rate. In the wake of resting his troops until a little before sunrise, he sent men out to supplant the scaffold planking. When this was done, Captain Charles Fordyce drove an organization of 60 grenadiers over the extension. They quickly skirmished with volunteer army guards, bringing the caution up in the camp past the entrenchments. Fordyce's men were then joined by an organization of naval force heavy weapons specialists who had been brought along to work the field cannons for the assault, while the Tory organizations exhibited themselves on the Norfolk side of the extension. 

The civilian army initiative in the camp at first idea the early skirmishing was a normal morning salute, and paid it little regard. Soon after reveille, the seriousness of the caution wound up obvious. While the camp activated, a state army organization numbering around sixty arranged for the British development behind the earthworks. They deliberately retained flame until the grenadiers, progressing with pikes fixed, were inside , and after that released a deluge of flame on the British segment. Fordyce, driving the segment, went down in a hail of black powder gun shoot just strides from the earthworks alongside a significant number of the men in the front positions. The British development broke up as the local army flintlock fire proceeded; about portion of Fordyce's power was executed, and many were harmed. The naval force heavy weapons specialists gave covering shoot as they withdrew back over the scaffold, however their little guns established no connection on the earthworks. 

Colonel Woodford had at this point composed the powers in the renegade camp, and they walked out to confront the British. After an immaterial trade of black powder gun discharge at long range, Woodford sent the sharpshooters of the Culpeper Minutemen off to one side. From this position the marksmen, whose weapons had an any longer range than black powder guns, started to shoot on the British position on the furthest side of the extension. The naval force heavy armament specialists, with the main weapons the British had accessible to challenge the marksmen at that extend, were currently out of position, and were additionally being compromised by the expansive civilian army compel moving toward the earthworks. They spiked their weapons and withdrew over the scaffold, and Captain Leslie requested his men to withdraw into Fort Murray. In approximately 25 minutes, Dunmore's endeavor to stop the renegade development close Norfolk had been unequivocally turned back. 

Following a ceasefire to allow the British to expel their dead and injured, the Tory powers sneaked out in the night to come back to Norfolk. Commander Fordyce was covered with full military distinctions by the renegades close to the site of the fight. Setback gauges ran from Dunmore's legitimate report of 62 slaughtered or injured to a got away from nationalist's report that the British misfortunes totaled 102, barring local army losses. The main asserted radical loss was one man with a slight injury to the thumb. Colonel William Woodford, covering the second Virginia Regiment's administration at the fight, wrote in a letter distributed in Purdie's "Virginia Gazette", December 15, 1775: "This was a second Bunker's Hill issue, in smaller than expected; with this distinction, that we kept our post, and had just a single man injured in the hand." 

The Virginia volunteer army powers were then fortified by the landing of troops from North Carolina under Colonel Robert Howe. Dunmore accused Leslie for his choice to assault without the going with redirection, in spite of the fact that the result of the fight might not have been distinctive even with the preoccupation, given the uniqueness in power sizes. In the next days, Dunmore and his Tory supporters took shelter on boats of the Royal Navy, and Norfolk was involved by the successful dissident powers. The peril Dunmore presented to the renegade reason, in any case, had not been disposed of. General George Washington, president of the Continental Army and a Virginian who knew Dunmore well, composed a letter to Charles Lee in late December, cautioning of proceeded with risk notwithstanding Dunmore's trip to the naval force. He revealed to Lee that "if that Man isn't squashed before Spring, he will end up being the most impressive Enemy America has", and that "nothing not exactly denying him of life or freedom will tie down harmony to Virginia." 

After a progression of accelerations over the agitator's refusal to enable arrangements to be conveyed to the stuffed vessels, Dunmore and Commodore Henry Pellow chose to shell the town. On January 1, 1776, Norfolk was annihilated in real life started by Royal Navy ships and their arrival parties, yet finished by radical troops that kept on plundering and consume the previous Tory fortress. 

Master Dunmore involved Portsmouth in February 1776, and utilized it as a base for assaulting activities until late March, when General Charles Lee effectively constrained him back to the armada. After further striking activities in the Chesapeake, Dunmore and the British armada left for New York City in August 1776. Dunmore stayed away forever to Virginia. 

A roadway marker was put by the territory of Virginia in 1934 close to the fight site. In light of development dangers to the war zone, nearby residents composed in 1999 to save the region.