2009 AAA 400 

The 2009 AAA 400 was the twenty-eighth stock vehicle race of the 2009 NASCAR Sprint Cup Series and the second in the ten-race season-finishing Chase for the Sprint Cup. It was hung on September 27, 2009 at Dover International Speedway, in Dover, Delaware before a horde of 110,000 individuals. The 400-lap race was won by Jimmie Johnson of the Hendrick Motorsports group after he began from post position. His partner Mark Martin completed second and Matt Kenseth came in third. 

Johnson won the post position and kept up his lead on the primary lap to start the race. After a challenge alert on lap 25, Ryan Newman turned into the pioneer of the race. Pursue for the Sprint Cup members Kurt Busch and Jeff Gordon were in the best ten for the vast majority of the race. Johnson recovered the lead, in the wake of passing Kurt Busch. Johnson kept up the main position to lead the most laps of 271, and to win his fourth race of the period. There were nine alerts and six lead changes among four unique drivers throughout the race. 

The race was Johnson's fourth win of the 2009 season, just as the forty-fourth of his profession. The outcome kept Martin in the number one spot in the Drivers' Championship, ten points in front of Johnson, and sixty-five before Juan Pablo Montoya. Chevrolet kept up its lead in the Manufacturers' Championship, forty-five in front of Toyota and seventy-five before Ford, who knock Dodge, with one-hundred and twenty-two points, to fourth place. The race pulled in 5.08 million audience members. 

Dover International Speedway is one of five short tracks to hold NASCAR races; the others are Bristol Motor Speedway, Richmond International Raceway, Martinsville Speedway, and Phoenix International Raceway. The NASCAR race utilizes the track's standard design, a four-turn short track oval that is long. The track's turns are banked at twenty-four degrees, and both the front stretch (the area of the end goal) and the backstretch are banked at nine degrees. 

Prior to the race, Mark Martin drove the Drivers' Championship with 5,230 points; Jimmie Johnson and Denny Hamlin were tied for second with 5,195 points each, 35 points behind Martin. Juan Pablo Montoya was fourth with 5,175 points, ten in front of Kurt Busch and nineteen in front of Tony Stewart in fifth and 6th individually. Ryan Newman with 5,151 was eleven points in front of Brian Vickers, as Greg Biffle with 5,138 points, was ten in front of Jeff Gordon. Carl Edwards and Kasey Kahne adjusted the main twelve positions in the Chase for the Sprint Cup with 5,117 and 5,069 points separately. In the Manufacturers' Championship, Chevrolet was driving with 199 points, thirty-nine points in front of their adversaries Toyota in second spot. Avoid, with 118 points, were one point in front of Ford in the fight for third spot. Johnson was the race's guarding champion. 

Three practice sessions were held before the Sunday race—one on Friday, and two on Saturday. The primary session endured an hour and a half, and the second 45 minutes. The last session endured an hour. In the principal practice session, Johnson was quickest, putting in front of Newman in second and Montoya in third. Biffle took fourth position and Kurt Busch put fifth. A. J. Allmendinger, David Reutimann, Kevin Harvick, Martin and David Gilliland adjusted the main ten quickest drivers in the session. Amid the session, Bowyer broke a rocker arm, and his group changed motors as an outcome. 

Albeit forty-four drivers were entered in the qualifier; as per NASCAR's passing technique, just forty-three could race. Every driver ran two laps, with the beginning request dictated by the contender's quickest occasions. Johnson secured his third post position of the period, with a period of 22.878. He was joined on the framework's first line by Montoya. Newman qualified third, Biffle took fourth and Reutimann began fifth. Kahne, Gordon, Bowyer, Sam Hornish, Jr. furthermore, Paul Menard finished the main ten positions. The driver that neglected to qualify was Scott Wimmer. Amid qualifying, Elliott Sadler's changed his vehicle's motor, after one fizzled amid the session. After the qualifier Johnson stated, "A shaft today will make the beginning of the end of the week much better and provide us a great deal of guidance and force moving into tomorrow, It carries you, and there is a part of energy. And yet, you must go out and perform." 

On Saturday morning, Kurt Busch was quickest in the second practice session, in front of Montoya in second, and Newman in third. Johnson was fourth fastest, and Bowyer took fifth. Kyle Busch oversaw 6th. Stewart, Hamlin, Matt Kenseth and Gilliland followed in the main ten. Of different drivers in the Chase, Biffle completed with the eleventh quickest time, while Kahne set the fourteenth quickest time. Kahne set the quickest time in the last practice session, while Montoya and Joey Logano followed in second and third separately. Martin was fourth speediest, in front of Biffle and Johnson. Kurt Busch was seventh quickest, Jamie McMurray eighth, Gilliland ninth and Martin Truex, Jr. tenth. Other pursue drivers included Newman in eleventh and Hamlin in eighteenth. 

The race, the twenty-eighth of a sum of thirty-six in the 2009 season, started at 2:00 p.m. what's more, was broadcast live in the United States on ESPN. Around the beginning of the race, climate conditions were shady with the air temperature ; a moderate shot of downpour was gauge. Minister Dan Schafer started pre-race services by giving the conjuring. Blue grass music gathering and Show Dog-Universal Music recording specialists Trailer Choir played out the national song of praise, and Sergeant Major John Jones of the Pennsylvania National Guard gave the direction for drivers to begin their motors. Amid the pace laps, Bowyer, Sadler and Tony Raines all needed to move to the back of the framework due to them changing their motors. NASCAR reported that a challenge alert would occur on lap 25, which means drivers would make compulsory pit stops. 

Johnson kept up his shaft position lead into the primary corner. One lap later, Newman passed Montoya for the second position. In the wake of beginning the race in twelfth, Martin had lost four positions to run eighteenth by lap 4. By the tenth lap, Johnson had developed a 1.2 second lead over Newman. Bowyer, who started the race at the back of the lattice, had climbed thirteen positions to twenty-ninth by lap 15. Two laps later, Raines headed to his carport. On lap 18, Kurt Busch passed Vickers for ninth, as Kahne guaranteed fourth position from Biffle, two laps later. On lap 25, the challenge alert turned out. Amid the alert, the majority of the pioneers made pit stops; Gilliland turned into the new pioneer on lap 28. After pit stops, Newman guaranteed the primary position and held it at the restart. 

On lap 31, a multi-fender bender happened thusly 3 as Logano was knock by Stewart, making him flip sideways, which gathered Truex, Robby Gordon and Reed Sorenson, inciting the second alert. On a similar lap, the warning was appeared to permit race authorities to clear the track of garbage. The race was restarted 24 minutes after the fact under alert. Newman kept up his lead at the restart, trailed by Kurt Busch and Menard. Three laps later, Montoya and Gordon passed Menard for fifth and 6th separately. On lap 43, Jeff Burton tumbled to ninth subsequent to being passed by Hamlin and Martin. Four laps later, Martin passed Hamlin for the thirteenth position. 

By lap 50, Johnson passed Reutimann to move once again into the main ten. On lap 58, Kurt Busch passed Newman to guarantee the lead. Three laps later, Jeff Gordon guaranteed fifth position off Kahne, while Menard was passed by Johnson for eighth. On lap 63, Montoya moved into the third position subsequent to passing Biffle, while Gilliland went to his carport to resign from the race. Two laps later, Kyle Busch asserted seventh position off Kahne, as Montoya passed Newman for second on lap 66. On lap 67, Gordon and Biffle passed Newman for third and fourth positions. Four laps later, Johnson guaranteed seventh from Kahne. On lap 80, Reutimann came up short on fuel, constraining him to make a pit stop. 

On lap 83, Biffle was passed by Johnson for the fourth position. One lap later, Michael Waltrip lost his vehicle's correct front tire and slammed into the divider, causing the third alert. The majority of the pioneers chose to make pit stops. Kurt Busch remained the pioneer at the restart, in front of Biffle and Kyle Busch. On lap 93, Kyle Busch passed Biffle for second position, while McMurray was passed by Kahne for ninth on lap 96. Three laps later, Biffle dropped to 6th in the wake of being passed by Jeff Gordon, as Montoya passed Kyle Busch for the third position on lap 113. Sixteen laps later, Kahne passed Jeff Gordon for 6th, while Stewart moved into the eighteenth position on lap 137. On the 147th lap, Kurt Busch was obstructed by Bobby Labonte, enabling Johnson to guarantee the lead. By the 150th lap, Kyle Busch dropped three positions to 6th in the wake of being passed by Martin, Kahne and Jeff Gordon. 

Green banner pit stops started on lap 152, when Hornish made a pit stop. Eleven laps later, the fourth alert turned out. Amid the alert, which was brought about by fluid on the track, the majority of the pioneers made pit stops. Kurt Busch recovered the lead for the lap 168 restart. Stewart moved into the eleventh position on lap 170. Six laps later, Johnson recovered the lead off Kurt Busch. By the 183rd lap, Johnson opened out a 1.6 second lead over Kurt Busch. Twenty-four laps later, Kyle Busch crashed into the divider thus 3 and turn 4, provoking the fifth alert. The majority of the pioneers made pit quits amid the alert. The race continued on lap 211, with Johnson driving from Jeff Gordon and Kurt Busch. 

By the 223rd lap, Johnson had a lead of 1.6 seconds. Twenty-seven laps later, Sorenson rejoined the race track. On lap 252, Stewart passed Allmendinger for the ninth position. Seven laps later, Stewart moved into eighth in the wake of passing Newman, and passed Bowyer for seventh on the 262nd lap. On lap 272, Johnson's lead of 3.5 seconds was decreased to nothing when the pace vehicle proceeded onward track. Amid the alert, which was brought about by David Stremme reaching the divider at turn 4, the majority of the pioneers made pit stops. Johnson remained the pioneer at the restart. On lap 286, Kahne was passed by Newman for ninth. By lap 290, Johnson developed a lead of two seconds. Seventeen laps later, Martin passed Kenseth for the fourth position. Johnson's lead had expanded to 2.2 seconds by lap 319. Five laps later, flotsam and jetsam was spotted on the track and the seventh alert was provoked. The majority of the pioneers chose to make pit quits amid the alert. 

Johnson kept up his lead at the restart, trailed by Martin and Kenseth. One lap later, Montoya moved into the second position, as Martin tumbled to fifth. On lap 336, Martin moved into fourth in the wake of passing Kurt Busch, and passed Kenseth for third two laps later. On lap 341, the eighth alert turned out when Regan Smith spun off, gathering Stremme, Truex and Sadler. Johnson kept the lead at the lap 347 restart. One lap later, Kenseth moved into the second position, as Stewart and Gordon moved into fourth and tenth separately. On lap 349, Gordon passed Newman for ninth, before tumbling to eleventh position after contact with Newman one lap later. On the 354th lap, Stewart was passed by Martin for the fourth position, as Johnson had manufactured a 2.2 second lead by lap 357. One lap later, Jeff Gordon moved into the ninth position in the wake of passing Newman. 

On the 368th lap, Hornish, spun on the backstraightaway, provoking the ninth and last alert of the race. Amid the alert, a portion of the pioneers made pit stops. Johnson kept up the lead on the lap 373. Four laps later, Newman passed Mears for eighth, as Edwards was passed by Stewart for twelfth. On the 383rd lap, Kahne, Allemndinger and Stewart passed Newman for seventh, eighth and ninth individually. On the following lap, Kenseth was passed by Martin for second position. On the 391st lap, Kahne was passed by Allmendinger for the second position. Two laps later, Johnson's lead had expanded to 2.2 seconds and held it to win the race. Martin completed second, in front of Kenseth in third, Montoya fourth, and Kurt Busch fifth. Gordon, Allmendinger, Kahne, Stewart and Newman balanced the main ten finishers. 

Johnson showed up in triumph path to praise his fourth triumph of the period before 110,000 individuals who went to the race. Johnson likewise earned $276,076 in race rewards. Subsequently, he stated, "I woke up (on Sunday) morning extremely idealistic. By about lap a few I realized we had an exceptionally adjusted vehicle and we'd be aggressive throughout the day, get a strong completion.", he proceeded, "I see folks get so stressed over what other individuals think, what other individuals state and invest a great deal of energy in those regions. That is not what works for me. (I) don't stare at the TV; don't watch or peruse any of the exchange papers or magazines. Simply disregard, overlook, disregard and spotlight on my reality and what's new with my race vehicle. That is i'll main event through the remainder of the Chase." 

Martin, who completed second, was open about the outcome, "We did actually well to complete second. I simply don't think we were in [Johnson's] group today." In the post-race public interview, Kenseth said of his outcome, "We didn't qualify generally amazing, however we were extremely content with our vehicle. At the point when the race began, I didn't think we were very comparable to we were yesterday (by and by), however we had the capacity to have great pit stops." Logano, who was associated with the greatest mishap of the race, "The greatest thing was, I was fine the entire time, [but] I'm not by any stretch of the imagination beyond any doubt what occurred. The spotter was clearing me low. When I got down there, they registered up running with the corner and I got labeled from behind." 

The race result kept Martin in the number one spot of the Drivers' Championship with 5,400. Johnson, who won the race, remained in second, ten points behind Martin, and sixty-five in front of Montoya. Kurt Busch moved into fourth position with 5,325 points. Stewart with fifth, Hamlin 6th, and Newman, Jeff Gordon, Biffle and Vickers followed in the best ten positions. The last two positions accessible in the Chase for the Sprint Cup were involved by Edwards in eleventh and Kahne in twelfth. In the Manufacturers' Championship, Chevrolet kept up their lead with 208. Toyota stayed second with 163. Portage pursued with 123, one point in front of Dodge in fourth. 5.08 million individuals watched the race on TV. The race took three hours, twenty-two minutes and eleven seconds to finish, and the edge of triumph was 1.970 seconds.