I Thought I Lost You 

"I Thought I Lost You" is a pop shake tune performed by both American artist musician and performer Miley Cyrus and on-screen character and vocalist John Travolta. The tune was co-composed by Cyrus with maker Jeffrey Steele. It was discharged to Radio Disney as advancement for the 2008 Disney enlivened film "Jolt", in which Cyrus and Travolta give the voices of Penny and Bolt. "I Thought I Lost You" was made after movie producers mentioned Cyrus to compose a tune for the film. The verses talk about getting lost and getting found. 

"I Thought I Lost You" was designated for Broadcast Film Critics Association Award for Best Song and Golden Globe Award for Best Original Song, yet lost both to Bruce Springsteen's "The Wrestler" from "The Wrestler" (2008). The melody's going with music video has Cyrus and Travolta playing out the tune in a chronicle studio and highlights cuts from "Jolt". "I Thought I Lost You" was advanced by few live exhibitions by Cyrus. 

Cyrus ended up included with "Jolt" when she was given a role as Penny, Bolt's proprietor. Producers approached Cyrus to compose a melody for herself and John Travolta, who stars as Bolt. She co-composed the melody with the guide of Jeffrey Steele, who additionally created the track, in a brief timeframe as they had a due date. The film's settings differ in urban areas all through the United States, which Cyrus figured she could catch in the tune. "Not simply make it something that sounds from Hollywood and truly delivered, yet we could add a little nation twang to it," she said. Cyrus said the composition procedure was simple. Prior to the melody's finish, Travolta consented to sing it, trusting "Great, it will be a charming tune, whatever it is." After tuning in to the tune, he was amazed at Cyrus' songwriting capacities. "She's truly talented at composing, and she truly needed to compose something bravo as the character Bolt, so she made a special effort with her reviewing accomplice to accompany something great, and I truly think they pulled it off", Travolta disclosed to MTV News. 

John Lasseter, official maker of "Jolt", chose to make "I Thought I Lost You" the subject for "Jolt", since it melodiously outlined the film's plot. He stated, "[The song] so aggregates up the topic of this film. You know, a canine and its proprietor and the two of them were isolated, however they adore each other such a great amount of — there's such a passionate result when these characters get rejoined, and I believe that is the thing that this current melody's about." Lasseter suspected that exclusively the tune worked, yet it worked better for the film. "I Thought I Lost You" is one of two melodies on the "Jolt" soundtrack and was discharged to Radio Disney to advance "Jolt" and its going with soundtrack. 

"I Thought I Lost You" is a pop shake melody and endures three minutes and thirty-six seconds. Its instrumentation incorporates electric guitar and piano. The melody is set in like manner time at a moderate shake rhythm of 103 beats for each moment. The melody is sung in the key of E♭ major and Cyrus' vocals length two octaves, from G to A♭. "I Thought I Lost You" pursues the harmony movement of E♭—A♭sus2. The tune's verses talk about "getting lost and getting found, with an overall subject of devotion." 

The tune got blended gathering from contemporary commentators. William Ruhlmann of AllMusic expressed, "The collection starts with a pop/shake melody, 'I Thought I Lost You,' which strangely seems like an affection two part harmony between John Travolta, a man in his mid-fifties, and the high school TV and pop star Miley Cyrus, until it is recollected that Travolta voices the motion picture's title character, a canine." "I Thought I Lost You" was named for the Broadcast Film Critics Association Award for Best Song at the fourteenth Broadcast Film Critics Association Award, yet lost to Bruce Springsteen's "The Wrestler" from "The Wrestler" (2008). The tune was named for the Golden Globe Award for Best Original Song at the 66th Golden Globe Awards, yet additionally lost to "The Wrestler". An uncredited commentator from the "Los Angeles Times" figured the tune could have been assigned for and won the Academy Award for Best Original Song at 81st Academy Awards. In any case, the commentator expressed that the likelihood of the occasion was broken by "a genuine deterrent [solely being utilized in "Bolt"s finishing credits] and loads of Disney rivalry." 

The music video for "I Thought I Lost You" debuted on November 3, 2008 on Disney Channel. The video starts with a clasp from "Jolt" in which one of the film's characters, Rhino, yells "Let it start!" Then a few clasps from the film play quickly until Cyrus and Travolta are appeared in an account studio. All through the remainder of the video, scenes shift back and forth among Cyrus and Travolta performing to cuts from "Jolt". It closes with Rhino playing out a short move. 

Cyrus initially performed "I Thought I Lost You" live on November 12, 2008 at an open air show broadcast by "Great Morning America". She likewise played out the track at the 2008 Macy's Thanksgiving Day Parade.