Reigomys 

Reigomys primigenus is a terminated oryzomyine rat known from Pleistocene stores in Tarija Department, southeastern Bolivia. It is known from various disengaged jaws and molars which demonstrate that its molars were practically indistinguishable to those of the living "Lundomys". Then again, the creature has various determined characteristics of the sense of taste which report a closer relationship to living "Holochilus", the family of South American bog rodents, and hence it was set in the variety "Holochilus" when it was first depicted in 1996. The consequent revelations of "Noronhomys" and "Carletonomys", which might be all the more firmly identified with surviving "Holochilus" than "H.â primigenus" is, have thrown its arrangement in "Holochilus" into uncertainty, and it was at last made the sort types of a different variety, "Reigomys". 

Material of "Reigomys primigenus" was gathered in 1924 and 1927 by Elmer Riggs of the Field Museum of Natural History, however the creature was not depicted until 1996, when Scott Steppan formally named it as another types of the sort "Holochilus" and analyzed it, differentiating it to related species. The material Riggs gathered incorporates nine mandibles, three maxillae, and five segregated molars. The particular name Steppan provided for the creature, "primigenus", signifies "crude" in Latin and alludes to the crude highlights of the creature when contrasted with its relatives "Holochilus" and "Lundomys". So as to decide the connections of his new species, Steppan did a cladistic investigation, in which he additionally incorporated the oryzomyines "Holochilus", "Lundomys", "Pseudoryzomys", and "Cerradomys", just as the non-oryzomyine "Sigmodon". His outcomes bolstered a nearby connection among "R.â primigenus" and surviving "Holochilus", with "Lundomys" and "Pseudoryzomys" all the more indirectly related. 

In 1999, another rat from a similar gathering was depicted: "Noronhomys", an as of late wiped out species from the Brazilian island of Fernando de Noronha. Michael Carleton and Storrs Olson, who portrayed the creature, contended that "Holochilus primigenus" was most likely outside the clade of "Noronhomys" and surviving "Holochilus" and that "H.â primigenus" ought to presumably be rejected from the variety. At the point when Ulyses Pardiăąas portrayed another wiped out rat from this gathering, "Carletonomys" from the Pleistocene of Argentina, he proposed that "H. primigenus" ought to be put in its very own variety in light of its mosaic of "Holochilus"- and "Lundomys"- like highlights. 

The phylogenetic examination led by Machado "et al." (2014) affirmed that living individuals from the class "Holochilus" are all the more firmly identified with "Noronhomys" and "Carletonomys" than to "H. primigenus". The creators moved "H. primigenus" to its very own variety, which they named "Reigomys". 

"Reigomys primigenus" was a huge rodent, however littler than both "Lundomys" and living "Holochilus", portrayed by a S-formed ("sigmodont") crown on the third lower molar. Highlights of the molars are about undefined from those of "Lundomys" and incorporate cusps situated inverse one another, veneer valleys that scarcely achieve the midline of the molars, and short mesolophs and mesolophids (extra peaks). Other prominent highlights incorporate a powerful mandible (lower jaw) with a steeply rising coronoid process, short sharp foramina (holes of the front piece of the sense of taste) that scarcely reach out between the main molars, and a short hard sense of taste that barely broadens beyonds the third molars, which are all common with surviving types of "Holochilus" to the prohibition of "Lundomys". Likewise not at all like in "Lundomys", there is an extra little root present at the labial (external) side of the primary upper molar. In eight examples that could be estimated, the length of the lower toothrow is 6.79 to 7.58â mm, averaging 7.28â mm; the main lower molar is 2.62 to 3.08â mm long, averaging 2.89â mm, and 1.75 to 1.93â mm wide, averaging 1.85â mm in seven estimated teeth; the main saved total upper toothrow is 6.64â mm long; and the primary upper molar is 2.63 to 2.70â mm long and 2.03â mm expansive in two examples. 

Stays of "Reigomys primigenus" originate from a few areas in waterway residue of the Tarija Formation in Tarija Department, which have been paleomagnetically dated to about 0.7 to 1.0 million years back (chrons Clr.ln to early Cln, Ensenadan South American land vertebrate age). Other sigmodontine rodents found there incorporate "Andinomys", "Calomys", "Kunsia", "Nectomys", "Oxymycterus", "Phyllotis", and another akodontine, most likely "Akodon", "Necromys", or a related family. The stores were kept by a waterway and the paleoenvironment was likely a floodplain or channel. "Reigomys primigenus" isn't known from some other areas and is viewed as wiped out.