Van Morrison: Too Late to Stop Now 

Van Morrison: Too Late to Stop Now is an account of artist Van Morrison, composed by Steve Turner. It was first distributed in 1993 in the United States by Penguin Group, and in Great Britain by Bloomsbury Publishing. Turner initially met Van Morrison in 1985; he met roughly 40 individuals that knew the subject in his examination for the life story. Van Morrison did not think decidedly about the account, and numerous papers announced he endeavored to buy the majority of the book's 25,000 duplicates. He sent a letter to the writer declaring the 40 people met for the book were not his companions, and blamed Turner for "hawking bends and errors about me by and by". 

The history takes a pictorial arrangement, and incorporates numerous photos of Van Morrison and scenes identifying with his life, including close-up shots and contact prints. Turner talks about Van Morrison's childhood in Belfast, Northern Ireland, and how early encounters formed his observations. Flute player John Payne was met for the book, and remarks on his work with Van Morrison on the collection "Astral Weeks". Turner examines Van Morrison's hesitance to be met or draw in with the general population, and incorporates cites from the performer about this longing for protection. The creator examines Van Morrison's endeavors to search out imagination, and his investigation of otherworldliness. The book finishes up with an evaluation of Van Morrison's encounters with religion. 

The book was chosen as "Editorial manager's Choice" in the "Sunday Age". "Distributers Weekly"<nowiki>'s</nowiki> audit of the book was disparaging of its "adulatory" tone, yet considered it a "need for fans", due the consideration of the discography. A survey of the book for "The Boston Globe" remarked "The estimation of the book is that it has at its heart similar subjects that the vast majority of Morrison's music has included ... religion and otherworldliness." "The Palm Beach Post" noticed that the life story gives "bits of knowledge and updates just as a strong foundation on Morrison's initial life". "The Sunday Times" composed that "the truly intriguing story here is told by the photos". "The Irish Times" was disparaging of the book's content yet composed decidedly of the included photos. 

Preceding his work on the account, Steve Turner had recently composed a book about the music bunch U2, titled "U2: Rattle and Hum", and Eric Clapton, titled "Discussions With Eric Clapton". Turner initially met Van Morrison in 1985, while composing a book on religion's place in shake music. Turner portrayed himself as somebody who seems to be "attracted to craftsmen irritated by profound issues". In his exploration for the book, the writer met roughly 40 individuals that knew Van Morrison. Turner talked with Van Morrison, and they examined the performer's perspectives on reasoning. A portion of the photos incorporated into the book were acquired by Turner from a guitarist with Van Morrison's band Them. 

As indicated by "The Sunday People", "however pundits said it was a friendly tribute about a pleasant man. Van proceeded to encourage fans not to get it." According to "The Boston Globe", Van Morrison "abhorred the book". In a meeting with "The Boston Globe", Turner remarked on this: "He considers whatever uncovers subtleties of family foundation or anything like that an attack of his protection. He doesn't have faith in histories, and I do." When the memoir turned out in hardcover, Van Morrison sent Turner 36 explanations from the book that he called "lies, net distortions and allusion". Van Morrison disclosed to Turner that none of the 40 people the creator had met for the account were at present companions of his. The letter from Van Morrison to Turner finished up with: "I am exceptionally sorry that you believe you are qualified for procure a living by hawking mutilations and errors about me by and by." In his answer letter to Van Morrison, Turner stated: "You may not think you are 'troublesome' or 'contemplative person' however other individuals do and reserve the privilege to express their conclusions." "The Sunday Times" revealed that "Purportedly, Van's administration even thought about purchasing up every one of the 25,000 duplicates of the book to mash them," and this was likewise announced in "The Independent". "The Evening Times" composed that Van Morrison "apparently endeavored to purchase every one of the duplicates of a memoir by Steve Turner." Representatives for Van Morrison did not affirm whether he endeavored to buy the 25,000 duplicates of the history, and affirmed that "delegates of the vocalist examined different conceivable outcomes". Van Morrison's supervisor, Chris O'Donnell, said of the performer: "He is distraught about books, period. He is a craftsman and supports himself – he doesn't need his private life raked over." 

Steve Turner showed up on a board of specialists in the 2008 narrative "Van Morrison: Under Review 1964–1974". Alongside Turner was Johnny Rogan, creator of the accounts "Van Morrison: A Portrait of the Artist" (1984) and "" (2005). 

The prologue to the book incorporates an examination by the writer of Van Morrison's expertise to utilize "a mind-blowing stuff". Turner contrasts Van Morrison and different artists of the timespan, including Robbie Robertson, Bob Dylan, and Neil Young. The book's 10 sections contain a pictorial diagram of the artist's expert work. The book's parts are organized by record arrivals of the performer. Pictures incorporate pictures from areas where Van Morrison experienced childhood in Belfast, contact prints from a photograph shoot for a spread collection with his better half at the time Janet Planet, and filed advertising photos of a more youthful Van Morrison. The start of the book incorporates 10 close-up shots of the artist. The book additionally contains a total discography of Van Morrison's work. 

Turner portrays Van Morrison's initial life as George Ivan Morrison on Hyndford Street in Belfast. "I'm unquestionably Irish", Van Morrison is cited as expressing in the book. He attests that Van Morrison was influenced by his mom's religious transformation to the Jehovah's Witnesses when he was a tyke. Turner expresses that this experience added to his situation as a pariah: "Who else in Belfast had a dad who played Jelly Roll Morton records, and a mother who enjoyed doorstep evangelism?" Turner examines Van Morrison's melodic associates, his triumphs, the separations of his different groups, and his endeavors to search out imaginative articulation. The writer incorporates analysis and pictures from Van Morrison's first discharge with the band Them in 1964, through to his most recent collection at the season of the book's production. 

Turner talked with flute player John Payne for the book, who had sat in on sessions with Van Morrison and later teamed up with him. Payne remarks on their work together on the collection "Astral Weeks", which additionally included performers Connie Kay, Warren Smith, Jay Berliner, and Richard Davis: "Unexpectedly, the picture you have when you tune in to the collection presently is of these folks who are on the whole together, and they understand they are making a stupendous masterpiece. The truth of the matter is that it was simply one more session for them." Payne conditions of his perceptions of Van Morrison's execution style: "When (Van) was in front of an audience, he would resemble a space cadet, yet then he'd open his mouth and you would understand that he had diverted everything into the sound of his voice. Its remainder was only a shell that was there to produce this clamor." 

The book takes note of the craftsman's hesitance to be met or connect with the general population, and statements him as saying: "It's exceptionally hard for me to identify with individuals making inquiries that are exhausting as well as don't have anything to do with my life ... It's an exercise in futility on my part since it channels me from doing what I truly need to do, which is simply to play music." Van Morrison depicts his apparent melodic job: "I simply feel I'm carrying out the responsibility. My main responsibility is to play music and convey the show ... It's progressively enthusiastic for the group of onlookers ... what they kind of think you are." He expresses that one of his inspirations is "in a perfect world to initiate conditions of reflection and delight, just as to make individuals think". 

The creator notes Van Morrison's abhorrence of similarity, and statements him as saying: "I loathe associations." Of his period in his life of experimentation, Van Morrison remarks: "I'm not hunting down anything specifically. I'm simply grabbing in obscurity ... for more light. That is it truly." Turner takes note of how melodic styles including beat and blues and Motown impacted the performer. Van Morrison's investigation of otherworldliness is talked about in the book, incorporating his encounters with magic, Christianity, and Dianetics. In the last section of the book, Turner remarks on Van Morrison's encounters in religion, expressing: "His improvement of religion as an ordinary point of talk in prominent tune may end up being his most enduring commitment." 

The book was chosen as "Editorial manager's Choice" in the "Sunday Age", where Michael Gordon stated: "This isn't the entire story, yet it is a well-explored and eminently exhibited synopsis of the story so far – a sort of friend to the John Lennon book, 'Envision' – including the fits. Fans may, in any case, can't help contradicting the end appraisal that Morrison might come up short on subjects and thoughts to express." "Distributers Weekly" was incredulous of the book's tone, remarking: "Turner is more adulatory than testing." The survey noticed: "A total discography makes this book a need for fanatics of the Irish Rover." Writing for "The Boston Globe", Thomas C. Palmer Jr. called the book "an end table memoir that fills a broad void, both for those hungry for tattle and for the individuals who have marveled at the wellspring of the imagination in this productive maker of frequently amazingly unique – if hard to classify – music". Palmer remarked on the book's esteem: "The estimation of the book is that it has at its heart similar subjects that the vast majority of Morrison's music has included, quietly or something else (however never as explicitly as Dylan in his "Spared" period): religion and otherworldliness." Robert Sandall evaluated the book for "The Sunday Times", and stated: "Steve Turner has played out his assignment as a biographer determinedly enough in Too Late To Stop Now, yet the truly intriguing story here is told by the photos." Sandall remarked: "Thirty years of consistent paddling with anyone who has ever attempted to draw near to him, and an erratic and fractious craving after religion (any religion) have abandoned him looking enlarged, dismal and, as Turner has the mettle and fairness to call attention to, not as incredible a performer now as his present notoriety would propose. It's everything there in the photos." 

Bernard Perusse of "The Gazette" portrayed the book as "increasingly shallow however progressively positive" than the 2006 account "" by Johnny Rogan. In an audit of the book for "The Palm Beach Post", Lisa McDonough expressed "Steve Turner's "Van Morrison: Too Late To Stop Now" isn't the last answer on Morrison – no one but Morrison could give that – however he provides bits of knowledge and updates just as a strong foundation on Morrison's initial life." Writing for "The Irish Times", John Boland was condemning of the book's content yet composed decidedly of its pictures: "Steve Turner's "Van Morrison: Too Late to Stop Now", has a trite, fanzine style message and isn't enlightening about the extraordinary man, yet it has some mind blowing pictures and in its foot stool group is certainly justified regardless of the asking cost". A survey in the "Envoy Sun" was basic: ""Too Late To Stop Now" is more fit to the end table than a library rack. It is perusing material, fleshed with previews, collection covers, PR shots, publications and prints. The words are minor fastens, there to hold the photos set up." The "Messenger Sun" noticed that the creator forgot basic statements from people that knew Van Morrison, and scrutinized Turner's objectivity.