Practice Date 

"Practice Date" is the fourth scene of the second period of "Parks and Recreation", and the tenth by and large scene of the arrangement. It initially broadcast on NBC in the United States on October 8, 2009. In the scene, Ann takes Leslie to supper to help get ready for her first date, while the remainder of the parks division endeavors to learn privileged insights about one another as a major aspect of a diversion. 

The scene was composed by Harris Wittels and coordinated by Alex Hardcastle. It highlighted stand-up comic Louis C.K. in his third visitor appearance as Dave Sanderson, a Pawnee cop who builds up a sentimental enthusiasm for Leslie. The scene additionally included an anecdotal sex outrage reflecting the genuine 2009 embarrassment of South Carolina Governor Mark Sanford. 

"Practice Date" was the primary scene to build up the identity of Jerry as the associate every other person in the workplace singles out, and denoted the first of a few appearances by Jay Jackson as news columnist Perd Hapley. As indicated by Nielsen Media Research, the scene was seen by 4.97 million family watchers, an improvement over the earlier week's scene, "Excellence Pageant". "Practice Date" got commonly positive audits, with a few reporters applauding it for fleshing out the characters of Ron and Tom. 

The scene opens with Leslie (Amy Poehler) and the remainder of the Parks division watching media inclusion of Pawnee Councilman Bill Dexhart (Kevin Symons), a wedded man, confessing to having four-route sex in a Brazilian cavern while professing to be "building houses for the underprivileged". He endeavors to legitimize it by saying that it was his birthday upon the arrival of the foursome, and that he "...really needed to do it." Tom (Aziz Ansari) demands no one could locate any shocking data about him, provoking the parks office representatives to begin a diversion to see who can get the most earth on one another. In the interim, Leslie tells Ann (Rashida Jones) she is anxious about her first date with Pawnee cop Dave Sanderson (Louis C.K.). Ann offers to take Leslie on a training date to help Leslie get ready for the genuine date. Amid the training date, Ann understands that Leslie has a major issue: Leslie carried note cards with "themes of discussion" and participates in phony sounding "work on chuckling." 

Ann chooses to utilize presentation treatment on Leslie to assist her arrangement with the most pessimistic scenario date situation. She acts exceptionally mean to Leslie, who is at first astonished, yet she in the long run confronts Ann. At the point when Ann discloses to her she is currently prepared for anything, Leslie feels brightened up and exceptionally certain. They go to a bar later to celebrate, where Leslie gets alcoholic. In the wake of leaving Ann, she visits Dave's home to reveal to him that she was anxious about their up and coming date, however at this point acknowledges he is fortunate to have her due to how "marvelous" she is. An apparently irritated Dave brings Leslie home. The following day, Leslie feels shocking for demolishing her odds with Dave. He touches base at her office later and she begins to apologize, however he says she can influence it to up to them on their second date, in this way consoling her the main date is as of now finished. Leslie by and by feels brightened up. 

In the mean time, amid the workplace diversion, Mark (Paul Schneider) reports Jerry's (Jim O'Heir) assenting mother was captured for cannabis ownership. A distressed Jerry said he didn't realize he was embraced, making Mark feel horribly remorseful. Afterward, Ron (Nick Offerman) pronounces himself the champ when he reveals to Tom he knows Tom's marriage to Wendy (Jama Williamson) is a green card marriage to keep her from being ousted to Canada. A frantic Tom swings to Mark for help in discovering soil on Ron, and Mark proposes Tom visit an away bar and address Ron's old companion Duke Silver. Tom visits the bar and learns Duke Silver is really the modify sense of self of Ron himself, who covertly plays saxophone in a jazz club. Tom goes up against Ron, who promptly calls a ceasefire to the amusement to keep his mystery from getting out (in the Pilot scene, Mark "trades out" some help Ron owes him, most likely that). In the wake of observing more film of Dexhart, Mark chooses he needs Ann to become familiar with all his very own dim mysteries from him. He visits her late during the evening and educates him concerning an issue he had with a hitched lady at age 16, among different mysteries. Albeit at first befuddled, Ann is at last complimented by the motion. April (Aubrey Plaza), baffled no one discovered soil on her, reports she drove a lawnmower through a Nordstrom retail establishment. 

"Practice Date" was composed by Harris Wittels and coordinated by Alex Hardcastle. The scene highlighted stand-up entertainer Louis C.K. in his third visitor execution as Dave Sanderson, a Pawnee cop impractically included with Leslie. Kevin Symons additionally showed up as Pawnee Councilman Bill Dexhart. The sex outrage including Dexhart reflected the genuine 2009 embarrassment of South Carolina Governor Mark Sanford, who freely admitted to a long-term extramarital undertaking with an Argentinian lady. 

"Parks and Recreation" co-maker Michael Schur imagined the thought for Ron Swanson's jazz artist adjust sense of self before they learned Nick Offerman really played the saxophone, in actuality, and had for as long as he can remember. Offerman commended the choice: "When he came to me and stated, 'You will have a change inner self who plays jazz saxophone,' I go, 'How would you see inside me?'" After the scene communicate, NBC made an official "Duke Silver" site, which incorporated a history, discography, surveys, exhibition, visit timetable and booking data for the anecdotal band. 

"Practice Date" denoted a defining moment for the character Jerry. Before the scene, Jerry had showed up in each scene, however his identity had not yet been created. Schur said the "Parks and Recreation" staff loved Jim O'Heir, so they cast him in the show and "made sense of we'd work it later". After the scene when Mark unintentionally uncovers Jerry was received, the authors based upon that joke and built up Jerry as the collaborator the remainder of the office singles out. Schur said after "Practice Date", "We understood that is his identity: He's the person who needs to put his head down and get his benefits, however is requesting it constantly. In the following three contents, it resembled tossing mate into the water. Each content after that had 15 pummels on Jerry. "Practice Date" denoted the first of a few appearances by Jay Jackson as Pawnee news correspondent Perd Hapley. The character was just initially proposed for one appearance, yet Schur said the staff making the most of his execution so much that they made him a common character. 

Inside seven days of the scene's unique communicate, three erased scenes from "Practice Date" were made accessible on the official "Parks and Recreation" site. The principal cut highlights around two minutes of broadened scenes, including Leslie discussing her tension about the date, Ann offering her recommendation, an alcoholic Leslie grumbling about the warmth in Dave's loft, which he covertly tells the camera is "solidifying cold at the present time". The second 75-second clasp includes a greater amount of Pawnee City Councilman Bill Dexhart's public interview about the sex outrage. Dexhart won't guarantee he won't proceed with his transgressions, which he demands is a sign he is never again misleading Pawnee occupants. Correspondents additionally examine Dexhart's charge card charges, which incorporate buys Dong-O-Rama Sex Toy Company, Smut Doctors and an item called "vibrating raisins". In the third 75-second clasp, Ron examines in detail his "deductively flawless ten-point size of human magnificence", the criteria for which he concedes is "amazingly sexist". It likewise included more film of Ron's Duke Silver persona, alongside meetings by more established ladies who fantasize about him. 

Leslie stresses she will raise the slaughter in the Sudanese nation Darfur to an extreme, or insufficient, amid her first date with Dave. While portraying his size of the engaging quality of ladies, Ron says tennis star Steffi Graf is a "flawless ten". Ron trusts Tom is wearing the robes of the Taliban, a Sunni Islamist political development, in a photograph he finds for the challenge. The photograph is really of Tom wearing a Halloween ensemble of a Jedi from the "Star Wars" universe. Tom learns one African American colleague gave cash to David Duke, a white patriot associated with the Ku Klux Klan, since "he guaranteed to bring down duties". 

In its unique American communicate on October 8, 2009, "Practice Date" was seen by 4.97 million family unit watchers, as indicated by Nielsen Media Research. The scene got a 2.2 rating/6 share among watchers matured somewhere in the range of 18 and 49. It was an improvement over the past two scenes, which drew 4.22 million family unit watchers and 4.63 million family watchers, individually. 

The scene got commonly constructive audits, with a few observers commending it for fleshing out more data about the supporting cast, such at Ron's jazz artist persona and the back story behind Tom's marriage and unending being a tease. In an article thinking about the show's second season, "Slate" magazine author Jonah Weiner named "Practice Date" the scene in which "Parks and Recreation" "genuinely hit its walk". Specifically, he called the historical verification amusement "a clever, affordable approach to breath life into them all the more clearly", and said the green card marriage subplot "on the double punctured (Tom's) foul faă§ade and developed our feelings toward him". "Amusement Weekly" essayist Henning Fog called "Practice Date" "the most fulfilling parody of the week", even contrasted with the wedding of Jim and Pam on "The Office" and a "Seinfeld" gathering on "Control Your Enthusiasm". Mist said the scene "figured out how to be sweet and sharp and completely comical" without a moment's delay, and adulated Poehler's extemporizing and Ron's jazz artist persona, however he said Mark's appearance at Ann's home to admit his life's transgressions was the scene's "feeble spot". 

Alan Sepinwall of "The Star-Ledger" said the scene was "totally fulfilling - amusing when it should have been, sweet when it needed to be". Sepinwall said Jones was especially clever amid the phony date, just as the "consistent one-upsmanship" among Ron and Tom. Matt Fowler of IGN said the scene had a "triumphant equation". He especially commended Jones amid the training date, just as Jerry's job amid the challenge, which Fowler said was a decent method to enable the supporting cast to cooperate. Steve Heisler of The A.V. Club said it appeared the scene "took all that they were warming up to in the course of the most recent couple of weeks, and hit them hard". Heisler especially lauded Poehler's execution, just as the collaborations among Ron and Tom. Interestingly, be that as it may, A.V. Club author Leonard Pierce said "Practice Date" "was the first run through all year I felt like "P&R" wasn't terminating on all chambers". 

"Practice Date", alongside the other 23 second season scenes of "Parks and Recreation", was discharged on a four-plate DVD set in the United States on November 30, 2010. The DVD included erased scenes for every scene.