Sister City (Parks and Recreation) 

"Sister City" is the fifth scene of the second period of "Parks and Recreation", and the eleventh generally scene of the arrangement. It initially circulated on NBC in the United States on October 15, 2009. In the scene, Leslie respects a designation from Venezuela, who act impolitely toward Pawnee and the United States. 

The scene was composed by Alan Yang and coordinated by arrangement co-maker Michael Schur. It included "Saturday Night Live" entertainer Fred Armisen in a visitor appearance as Raul, the leader of the Venezuelan assignment. As indicated by Nielsen Media Research, the scene was seen by 4.69 million family unit watchers, a drop from the earlier week. The scene got commonly positive audits. 

Leslie (Amy Poehler) and the Pawnee parks office get ready for a visit by park division authorities from Boraqua, Pawnee's Sister City in Venezuela. Leslie cautions her associates the Venezuelan government authorities will probably be poor, basic individuals. Afterward, the Venezuelan appointment arrives, headed by their parks division bad habit executive Raul Alejandro Bastilla Pedro de Veloso de Morana, the Vice-chief Ejecutivo del Diputado del Departamento de Parques, L.G.V. (Fred Armisen), Antonio, Jhonny and Elvis. There are social conflicts immediately, similar to when they botch Tom (Aziz Ansari) for a hireling and request him to get their sacks. They additionally erroneously trust they can pick any lady to engage in sexual relations with; they all support Donna (Retta). Raul and Leslie trade endowments amid a meet-and-welcome gathering, where Raul and the Venezuelans demonstration condescendingly toward the Pawnee occupants, making hostile comments about the town and taunting the blessings Leslie gives them. They keep on offering requests to Tom, who tracks with on the grounds that they give him expansive money tips. 

The Venezuelan understudy Jhonny (JC Gonzalez) experiences passionate feelings for April Ludgate (Aubrey Plaza), who persuades him she is dreaded and extremely incredible. Jhonny is insane and experienced passionate feelings for April and sent her his vehicle to lift her up yet she utilized his vehicle to head out to films with her companions. In the mean time, Leslie tells the Venezuelans that she is looking to bring $35,000 to top off in a pit to make a recreation center. Raul and his partners begin to giggle, disclosing to her they have quite a lot of cash from oil, they can fabricate anything they desire. Leslie, who is becoming progressively irritated with the Venezuelans, chooses to take them to Pawnee's most pleasant park bearing in mind the end goal of inspiring them. Rather, they are nauseated, and Raul botches the recreation center for the previously mentioned pit. Leslie later takes them to an open gathering to demonstrate them majority rule government in real life, yet the majority of the residents yell furious and irritated inquiries at Leslie. A disinterested Raul ponders where are the outfitted watchmen to take the protestors to imprison. At the point when Raul reveals to Leslie they live like rulers in Venezuela and answer to no one, she detonates in resentment, offending their regalia and Hugo Chavez. The Venezuelans storm out. 

Leslie assembles a conference and apologizes to Raul, who thusly apologizes also and offers Leslie a check for $35,000 to fill in the pit. Leslie fears it might be "grimy cash", yet acknowledges. Amid a photograph opportunity later, Raul sets up a camcorder and asks Leslie state "Viva Venezuela" and "Viva Chavez" to it. Against her desires, Leslie reluctantly does as such. At the point when Raul begins communicating in Spanish to the camera, Leslie requests that April interpret, and learns Raul is examining his "Board to Humiliate and Shame America". An enraged Leslie destroys the $35,000 check and yells "Viva America", provoking Raul to announce Pawnee is never again their sister city and tempest out. Leslie demands she will collect the cash to construct the recreation center without them and Tom, motivated by her model, covertly puts all the tip cash he produced using the Venezuelans into the recreation center gift container. The scene closes with Leslie and Tom later getting an online video from April, who reveals to them she and Donna are traveling with Jhonny (JC Gonzalez) in his Venezuelan royal residence, which is looked out for by furnished gatekeepers. 

"Sister City" was composed by Alan Yang and coordinated by arrangement co-maker Michael Schur. The scene included comic Fred Armisen in a visitor appearance as Raul, the bad habit chief of a Venezuelan parks office. Armisen was a cast individual from NBC's sketch satire show "Saturday Night Live", where he recently worked with entertainer Poehler and essayist Schur. Armisen has played Venezuelan characters previously, and recently imitated President of Venezuela Hugo Chavez on "Saturday Night Live". Armisen said he got into character by pondering his uncle, who is from Venezuela. Be that as it may, he said it was anything but a troublesome act on the grounds that "the vast majority of the joke is the uniform", which incorporated a tan military-style coat with awards, a red beret and a band with the shades of the Venezuela banner. The uniform likewise incorporated an anecdotal seal planned by Schur, which incorporated a picture of Chavez, assault rifles, an oil tower, a lion and a parrot. 

Schur said of the scene's plot, "They're extremely confounded in light of the fact that in Venezuela the administration is so amazing; their parks office goes with military escorts and motorcades and stuff. They have all the cash on the planet as a result of their oil and they (don't comprehend) why Pawnee's parks office is so rinky-dink." A fanatic of "Parks and Recreation" since its origin, Armisen said he chuckled when he read the content, and thought that it was much more entertaining amid the table read with the cast. In the wake of working with Armisen, Rashida Jones portrayed him as "one of the most clever individuals on earth". 

Inside seven days of the scene's unique communicate, three erased scenes from "Sister City" were made accessible on the official "Parks and Recreation" site. In the initial 100-second clasp, Ron discusses his scorn for communism, and Raul says he fears Ron as a result of his mustache, which he said influences him "to cringe in dread" (over and over saying the word 'mustache'). In the second moment long clasp, Raul talks about the awards he got for his parks-related achievements, including "getting rid of individuals making addresses in the parks", "arranging the rubbish so it's not everywhere" and "taking a gander at the leaves". In the third 100-second clasp, Raul and the Venezuelans question why Leslie does not have a goliath oil painting of herself in her office. After his last contention with Leslie, Tom won't pursue Raul's requests to open the entryway for him, and Raul experiences difficulty opening it since "it's been some time since I've done this". 

"Sister City" to a great extent depicted Chavez and his communist philosophy in a negative light. The content depicts the Venezuelans as putting down and disdainful toward Americans. They over and again guarantee Pawnee and the United States are sub-par contrasted with the power and magnificence they are acquainted with in Venezuela. Their pessimistic demeanor toward Americans is especially shown by the name of their assignment, the Committee to Humiliate and Shame America, just as the line from one of the agents, "This isn't close to home. We simply think you are powerless and your city is appalling." 

While examining what number of TV stations he gets in Venezuela, Raul said he definitely realizes who wins "Venture Runway", a style structure unscripted tv appear on the Bravo arrange. In endeavoring to keep up poise notwithstanding affronts from the Venezuelans, Leslie said she was following the case of U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, of whom she stated, "No one takes a punch like her. She's the most grounded, sharpest punching pack on the planet." Raul says his city is likewise a sister city to Kaesong, North Korea, which he said is "far more pleasant" than Pawnee. 

In its unique American communicate on October 15, 2009, "Sister City" was seen by 4.69 million family unit watchers, as per Nielsen Media Research. It was a drop from the earlier week's scene, "Practice Date". "Sister City" got a 2.0 rating/6 share among watchers matured somewhere in the range of 18 and 49. The scene got commonly positive audits. "Excitement Weekly" author Henning Fog said "Sister City" proceeded with a pattern of greatness in the second season that has built up "Parks and Recreation" as NBC's best satire. Haze said the scene additionally further extended its characters, by demonstrating Leslie is definitely not a total sucker and Tom is a thoughtful individual. 

Salon.com essayist Heather Havrilesky considered the scene a "moment great", and especially applauded the visitor execution of Fred Armisen. She said the scene "profits by the demonstrate's journalists' expanding propensity for giving everything from political outrages to weak neighborhood occasions the Onion treatment". Alan Sepinwall of "The Star-Ledger" said it was "another solid one", and said the Leslie character is becoming not so much dumbfounded but rather more three-dimensional. Robert Philpot of the "Post Worth Star-Telegram" said he trusted the show still too intently took after "The Office", yet that "Sister City" "demonstrated that "Parks and Recreation" can rise to "The Office" for comic uneasiness". Fowler of IGN said the counter American notion shown by the Venezuelan assignment "was an amusing turn that didn't totally destroy itself, despite the fact that it approached". Fowler especially lauded Armisen, who he said gambled dominating the standard cast, and the harsh parody of Plaza. Not all surveys were sure. The A.V. Club author Leonard Pierce, who said he felt the second season had been magnificent up until this point, depicted "Sister City" as "effectively the weakest scene of the period, possibly the arrangement". Penetrate called the political hints "ham-gave", the funniness was too ludicrous, and the scene experienced the nonattendance of a large portion of the supporting cast. 

"Sister City", alongside the other 23 second season scenes of "Parks and Recreation", was discharged on a four-circle DVD set in the United States on November 30, 2010. The DVD included erased scenes for every scene. It likewise incorporated an analysis track for "Sister City" including Amy Poehler, Fred Armisen, Alan Yang and Michael Schur.