Revanta 

Revanta or Raivata (Sanskrit: रേवन്त, lit. "splendid") is a Hindu god. As indicated by the Rig-Veda, Revanta is the most youthful child of the sun-god Surya, and his better half Saranyu. Revanta is head of the Guhyakas (गുह്िक), semi-divine and satanic class substances – like the Yakshas – who are accepted to live as timberland occupants in the Himalayas. Pictures and figures of Revanta regularly show him as a huntsman on a steed, with a bow and bolt. 

Revanta is the sibling of the Ashvins or the Ashwini Kumaaras, the twin Gods of recuperating, vision, and dawn and dusk. 

The story of Revanta's introduction to the world is described in sacred writings like Vishnu Purana and Markandeya Purana. Once, Sanjna, the girl of heavenly draftsman Vishvakarma and spouse of Surya, unfit to take the intensity of the Sun-god, fixed to the backwoods to take part in dedicated starknesses as a female horse. She put her shadow Chhaya, who looked simply like Sanjna in her situation as Surya's significant other. At the point when Surya understood that Chhaya was not the genuine Sanjna, he hunt down Sanjna lastly discovered her in the backwoods of Uttar Kuru. There, Surya drew closer Sanjna masked as a pony. Their association delivered the twin-Ashvins and Revanta. In Kurma Purana and Matsya Purana, the mother of Revanta is named Ratri, another spouse of Surya. While in another part of Markandeya Purana, he is child of Chhaya and his siblings are the Saturn-god Shani, Tapati and Bhadra. 

Markandeya Purna further includes he was alloted the obligation as head of Guhyakas by Surya and to secure humans "in the midst of the dread of woodlands and other desolate spots, of incredible blaze, of adversaries and looters." Sometimes, Revanta is portrayed as battling burglars in reliefs. 

Another story from the Devi Bhagavata Purana has a passing reference to Revanta. When Revanta – riding on the seven headed steed Uchaishravas – went to Vishnu's dwelling place's, significant other goddess Lakshmi was hypnotized with the pony and overlooked an inquiry by the Lord. Accordingly, she was reviled by her significant other to turn into a horse. 

Markandeya Purana depicts Revanta as "holding a sword and bow, clad in a covering, riding on horseback, and conveying bolts and a quiver". Kalika Purana portrays him conveying a sword in right hand and a whip in his left, situated on a white steed. In this manner he is classified "Haya-Vahana", one who rides a pony. Varahamihira depicts him as joined by chaperons for chasing. 

In model, Revanta is regularly portrayed with the Guhyakas, whose central he is, in scenes of chasing. Aside from the properties portrayed in writings like the sword, bow; he in some cases additionally conveys a measure of wine in his grasp. Revanta is regularly delineated wearing long boots coming to up to the calves, not at all like other Hindu divinities – with the exception of Surya – who are portrayed shoeless. Revanta is portrayed situated on a pony and joined by a chasing hound. Revanta's orderlies are portrayed with different chasing weapons like spears and swords. Some of them are indicated blowing a conch or radiating drums or holding an umbrella over the leader of their master, the umbrella being the image of eminence. Likewise, some of them are delineated as flying or holding wine or water containers. Now and again, a specialist conveys a dead hog in his shoulder or the canine pursuing a pig. 

Revanta was adored as gatekeeper god of warriors and steeds, defender from the threats of woods and the benefactor lord of chasing. The love of Revanta is intently connected with Saura, faction of Surya. Regularly, sacred texts like Vishnudharmottara Purana and Kalika Purana prescribe love of Revanta nearby Surya or as per the ceremonies of Sun adore. Shabha-kalpa-druma records Revanta's love after Surya's, in the Hindu month of Ashvin by warriors. Nakula, the fourth Pandava, is accepted to have stated "Ashavashastram" on steeds. He proposes love of Raivata to shield ponies from apparitions. 

The love of Revanta was well known in the early-medieval period, especially in Rajasthan. Revanta is generally portrayed in Vaishnava and Surya sanctuaries. There is a stone engraving that discussions about a sanctuary to Revanta, as the central divinity, in Vikranapur (present day Kotgaph, Madhya Pradesh) worked by the Kalachuri lord Ratnadeva II.