3 Words (tune) 

"3 Words" is a tune recorded by English vocalist Cheryl Cole for her 2009 introduction studio collection of a similar name. It was discharged in the UK and Ireland on 20 December 2009 by Fascination Records and later in 2010 by Universal Music, once in a while filling in as the lead single for "3 Words". The uptempo move pop tune was composed by Cole and George Pajon. It was likewise composed and delivered by will.i.am who has visitor vocals on the melody. "3 Words" was refered to by Cole as her main tune from the collection for being unique in relation to what individuals anticipated. 

"3 Words" was commended by contemporary commentators, who said it was "a modern love tune" and the "champion track" from the collection. Its unusual creation relinquishes the utilization of "refrain melody section" structure, rather selecting a throbbing development to a peak. The going with video, coordinated by Saam, highlights the vocalist in different design troupes frequently standing out shading from will.i.am, and paying reverence to Madonna. It additionally utilizes split screen cinematography and camera impacts for the progress of scenes. 

The melody was advanced on "Cheryl Cole's Night In". The single was less industrially effective contrasted with its forerunner "Battle for This Love" however in spite of not topping at number one, it proceeded to turn into Cole's second successive UK top-five and Irish-top ten hit. It was additionally a best five hit in Australia and has since been affirmed platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association and silver by the British Phonographic Industry. 

"3 Words" is an uptempo move pop melody which highlights visitor vocals from will.i.am who delivered the tune just as, composing the verses with Cole and George Pajon. Filling in as the opening and title tune of Cole's presentation collection, the tune is written in the key of C♿ minor with a period signature in like manner time and a rhythm of 129 beats for every moment. Perceptibly absent is the standard utilization of a "refrain melody stanza tune structure". The melody's supporting track comprises of a scanty yet complex harmony movement of C♿ m, G♿ m, C♿ and A noteworthy/C♿. The creation highlights circles of acoustic guitar with a piano tune to frame an "environmental love melody" in the vocal scope of G♿ to B. 

Faultfinders expressed that the "advanced love tune" is hard to class by classification since it was "offbeat", something which Cole concurred when she stated, "[its] entirely unexpected from anything I've done [with Girls Aloud] or preferred previously". Some industry faultfinders additionally noticed that "3 Words" was "not normal for some things as of now [at that time] on radio or being discharged". Cole said that the tune was motivated by her recently obtained love for move music on the outlines, particularly David Guetta and Kelly Rowland's "When Love Takes Over". 

Cole portrayed it as her main tune on the collection and music pundits by and large concurred. Tom Ewing of "The Guardian" considered the tune Cheryl's "feature [...] based on dim circles of treated acoustic guitar and working into a claustrophobic move track. It's as daring and novel a tune as anything Cole's gathering have discharged." Daniel Wilcox even ventured to state the melody was "undeniably more fascinating and creative than anything her young lady bunch has done in their whole vocations." "3 Words" has been portrayed as "entrancing in its languor" just as being "not normal for anything Cheryl or Will.I.Am have discharged" and "to what's as of now being played on the radio." It was named a champion track by numerous commentators, with Killian Fox of "The Observer" alluding to the tune as "a smooth, complex love tune that indicates what this collection could have been." David Balls of Digital Spy expressed, "Censuring conventional stanza chorale refrain tune structure, and starting with extra acoustic guitar strums, '3 Words' constructs gradually towards a throbbing and irresistible, if marginally short, arms noticeable all around peak [...] it's difficult to deny that Chez pulls off this not exactly clear offering easily." 

Louise McCudden of Inthenews.co.uk, in any case, contended that despite the fact that "her voice sounds wonderful [...] the melody itself is excessively long and ends up dull genuinely quick." Vicki Lutas had a for the most part negative audit for the tune saying "by the day's end it sounds like something you could have made up when you were at school", however she praised the sponsorship track for being "dim, scary and cold in a chilling manner; in an irresistible way". Anyway she called attention to that "the vocal course of action and the genuine vocals themselves do nothing more for the melody", and regarded that "it's a valiant tune decision, yet it's hap-danger vocal line appears to shout... C-R-I-N-G-E.". 

In the United Kingdom, "3 Words" made its official introduction on the UK Singles Chart at number twenty-six, after solid computerized deals from the arrival of the collection, two weeks earlier. At that point multi day before its computerized discharge and two days before its CD discharge the single moved to number fourteen. Later amid the principal seven day stretch of 2010 it would proceed to top at number four, giving Cole her third successive top-five UK hit if her element on will.i.am's "Heartbreaker" is incorporated. On 14 May 2010 the single was confirmed silver by the British Phonographic Industry (BPI) for transportation 200,000 duplicates. 

The single likewise made top ten progress in the Republic of Ireland, where it achieved number seven turning into her third back to back top-ten single. Fortuitously, it is the second tune including Cole's vocals to crest at number seven in Ireland, the first being will.i.am's "Heartbreaker". Universally the single crested top five in Hungary, and Australia. In the last it performed superior to anything any tune Cole discharged with Girls Aloud beating the past best passage "Hop" by eighteen spots. "3 Words" is the main tune from Cole's presentation collection to top inside the best fifty of the Australian Singles Chart and was in this manner confirmed platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association (ARIA) for delivery 70,000 units. Moreover it crested at top-ten in Italy. 

The tune appeared at 14 on the Recording Industry Association of New Zealand. It later rose to number 12, remaining in the graphs for 12 weeks. 

Cole taped two music recordings for "3 Words". The principal music video was a viral form coordinated by Vincent Haycock, in the week starting 19 October 2009 "on the main blustery night in Los Angeles in a half year." The second form was the official "split screener", coordinated by Saam, that debuted on 27 November 2009. The video was portrayed as being particularly not quite the same as that of past single "Battle for This Love", attracting correlations with Madonna and Lady Gaga. The general objective of the video was portrayed as "tell[ing] the narrative of a couple who mingle independently and are both drawn closer by individuals from the contrary sex. Notwithstanding the other individual appearing sentimental enthusiasm for them". The artists proceed to proclaim each other is 'the adoration for my life' and 'through the ups and the downs... never let go'." The "restless and aesthetic" video includes "a split screen, capricious camera points and present day move." 

The video starts with Cole sitting nearby will.i.am, wearing a "Woman Gaga-motivated bleach blonde wig" and a ribbon shroud. In the early scenes she "swaps her bronzed tan for alabaster skin, smokey eyes and pale lipstick". In the following scene she can be "seen looking insightfully into the separation in a smooth floor-length dark dress with darker hair augmentations falling over her shoulders", while in a third scene she is portrayed as an "Egyptian goddess". Every scene consolidates "move shots blended with groupings in which the emphasis falls on the two stars alone, apparently looking through one another, so to speak ... testing more with her looks and notwithstanding taking a risk with Lady Gaga-esque outfits for her artists, including cloak that spread their appearances and dark leotards." It's shot with a split screen, which means Cheryl and will.i.am don't come into physical contact. 

The video got blended to positive surveys from commentators who applauded Cole's feeling of design yet refered to that the video was predictable. Elena Gorgan of Softpedia said "even with this, she barely figures out how to make a solid impression ... the video neglects to break any visual ground, but remaining alone as a classy video." "The Daily Mail" concurred saying "[The story] which will no uncertainty be translated by fans as a knowledge into Cheryl's marriage to footballer Ashley Cole. Cheryl has dumped her road move gear for an outfit fit for a diva alongside reasonably styled huge hair ... In any case, as she collaborates with Black Eyed Peas rapper will.i.am is brandishing a progressively female look. The net outcome is, sorry to learn it, magnificent yet a bit on the dull side." Lisa McGarry of 'Falsity TV' said the platinum wig was "weird" She likewise said "in the event that it doesn’t look extraordinary, in any event it looks stunning." Meanwhile, David Balls of 'Computerized Spy' said "[in] this breathtaking split-screen issue, Cheryl looks easily tasteful and glitz as she changes into an Egyptian goddess and - with more accomplishment than a specific Mrs. B (Mel B) in 2001 [with "Feels so Good"] - tells the best way to wear a blonde wig without appearing as though you're on a messy end of the week in the Toon. Superbly complimenting the melody itself, this super-shiny clasp likewise proposes that Cole has a firm eye on worldwide fame throughout the following year." "Popularity" magazine called the video "somewhat edgier than anything Girls Aloud have done". 

The melody got its overall radio debut on 13 October 2009 on BBC Radio 1's "The Chris Moyles Show". Cole performed "3 Words" out of the blue with will.i.am amid her erratic extraordinary for ITV, "Cheryl Cole's Night In". A journalist of "The Daily Mail" said Cole "performed in "a marvelous streaming Kate Bush-esque dark outfit". In January 2010 Cole traveled to Germany to perform "3 Words" at German Award Ceremony, DLD Starnight at the Haus der Kunst in Munich. She likewise played out the melody as a major aspect of a four-tune set at 'BBC Radio 1 "Major Weekend" just as performing at the 'De Grisogono gems evening gathering' at the Eden Rock Hotel in Cap d'Antibes amid the Cannes Film Festival. 

"3 Words" was recorded at Record Plant Studios, Los Angeles (CA).