Response (The Spectacular Spider-Man) 

"Response" is the eighth scene of the American vivified TV arrangement "The Spectacular Spider-Man", which depends on the comic book character Spider-Man, made by Stan Lee and Steve Ditko. The scene initially communicate in the United States on the Kids WB! hinder for The CW on May 3, 2008, where it was appraised TV-Y7-FV. 

The scene subtleties Dr. Otto Octavius as an inadvertent lab episode brought about by the Green Goblin where the radiation consolidates exceptional mechanical arms to his skin and apparently harmed his cerebrum (in spite of the fact that it was later recommended that what was translated as cerebrum harm was in certainty his brain overhauling itself to oblige four additional appendages), and diverts him from a meek and feeble researcher into the scalawag Dr. Octopus. "Response" was coordinated by Jennifer Coyle and was the main scene of the arrangement to be composed by Randy Jandt. While composing the teleplay, Jandt was tested with remaining consistent with the first material of Spider-Man, especially towards that of Dr. Octopus. 

"Response" got commonly positive surveys, with TV commentators singling out Dr. Octopus' depiction. Octopus' character configuration was commended by both the architects and Coyle; the last noticed that his plan enabled her to guide them unreservedly in various habits, and that the arms specifically were especially well-done. Subside MacNicol voiced the character and utilized a voice roused by that recently on-screen character Laird Cregar. It is accessible on both the third volume DVD set for the arrangement, just as the total season box set. 

Dr. Otto Octavius endeavors to gripe to his manager Norman Osborn about the risks of a few late investigations they have been performing to make super scalawags in his research facility, yet is immediately upbraided by Osborn for his "crying." Octavius throws in the towel and gets down to business inside an experimentation chamber while Osborn leaves. Unbeknown to him, the miscreant Green Goblin sneaks into the lab, initiating the chamber's generators while locking Octavius inside. While ineffectively endeavoring to escape from the chamber, the radiation discharged breakers the mechanical limbs he is wearing into his skin. 

Osborn and others touch base on the scene to kill the generator, while Spider-Man hops in to help get Octavius out of the destruction. At the point when the specialist awakens, he assaults Osborn with his arms and sticks him to a divider. At the point when Spider-Man attempts to mediate, Octavius forgets about him too with one of his appendages, pronouncing himself "Dr. Octopus." He takes a power battery to revive his arms and tempests out of the structure, utilizing his appendages as additional appendages. The following day, Peter, Gwen, Harry and a portion of Harry's new prevalent companions go to Coney Island, where Harry inspires everybody with his recently discovered quality. Liz Allan starts to connect herself to Peter and the two have some good times time. Notwithstanding, Peter spots Dr. Octopus and surrenders the gathering to seek after him as Spider-Man. 

Bug Man pursues Dr. Octopus to TriCorp, where he endeavors to take a power pack from a vault. Arachnid Man swoops in and gets to the power source before him. He at that point runs out, with Dr. Octopus seeking after him, wanting to make the specialist come up short on vitality. They achieve Coney Island through their resulting fight and Octopus, mindful of Spider-Man's craving to spare guiltless lives, captures Liz. With just an hour of vitality left, he moves to the highest point of a crazy ride, driving Spider-Man to pick between the power pack and Liz. Bug Man tosses the pack noticeable all around before protecting Liz; he draws near to Dr. Octopus as the last scrambles for the power pack and can remove it from him, effectively crushing the specialist. 

At the point when Peter comes back to the gathering, he finds that Liz is saying a final farewell to her beau Flash Thompson after the last gets desirous that she went through the day so near Peter. Sally censures Peter for it and races to comfort Liz. Gwen approaches Peter, and the two concur they need a discussion with Harry about his aggressive frame of mind towards them and steady bizarre conduct. 

"Response" was composed by Randy Jandt and coordinated by Jennifer Coyle. It initially broadcast on the Kids WB! hinder for The CW on May 3, 2008, at 10:00 a.m. Eastern/Pacific time, with a parental direction rating of TV-Y7-FV. The scene's title, "Response," extends the arrangement subject "The Education of Peter Parker" picked by engineer Greg Weisman. Scenes in the third season one bend all mutual a naming plan dependent on science. 

The scene was the first of the arrangement to be written by Jandt, who said that the chance to take a shot at the arrangement was "both exciting and somewhat overwhelming, essentially due to the raised desires for such a prominent, built up establishment." To meet these desires, he pursued an oversimplified strategy—"be aware of the history, tune in to the bearing and direction of Greg Weisman, and after that compose a scene with a decent, engaging story that is stuffed with as much activity and amusingness as 22 minutes will permit." Writing for Dr. Octopus specifically was troublesome out of the blue essayist as he had "such a scope of character." 

"Response" denoted the principal appearance of Dr. Otto Octavius as Dr. Octopus. Coyle noticed her energy for the character, especially towards his plan; she has given imperative applause towards his arms, as they "are stunning, and the planning has been great for this show, to such an extent that I think you feel the effect of those arms." Coyle likewise trusts that individuals can associate with the character on various dimensions. Additionally, Sean Galloway—a character creator on the series—said that he is "most likely one of [his] top picks" to have planned. 

Dwindle MacNicol was cast to play Dr. Octopus. MacNicol had featured in primetime TV arrangement, including "Chicago Hope," "Numb3rs," and "Boston Legal," while likewise being a veteran to the voice acting calling on enlivened arrangement, for example, "The Wild Thornberrys" and "Buzz Lightyear of Star Command." MacNicol based Dr. Octopus' voice on that of Laird Cregar, a 1940s performer who, all through his brief profession, was tested with stoutness, until he lost an excessive amount of weight and kicked the bucket at age 30. MacNicol, however, noticed that he is "no copy and it was Cregar's quality as opposed to his voice which gave me my model." 

"Response" wound up accessible on the DVD "The Spectacular Spider-Man, Volume 3," on March 17, 2009, close by the scenes "Impetuses" and "The Uncertainty Principle." The volume highlighted scenes that nitty gritty Green Goblin as an unmistakable or supporting character. "Response" additionally wound up accessible on the full season DVD box set entitled "The Spectacular Spider-Man: The Complete First Season DVD," which included each other scene of season one for the arrangement. 

"Response" got a by and large positive reaction from faultfinders. Eric Goldman of IGN, giving the scene a 8.2. rating ("Impressive"), composed positively, taking note of that the portrayal Dr. Octopus "was shrewd – on one hand, he was a pathetic, groveling sucker. Yet, when Norman was upbraiding him we got a concise take a gander at the outrage inside, as he envisioned assaulting Norman with his automated limbs." Goldman praised both Dr. Octopus' line, "I've been great" and when Spider-Man collides with a few toys, just to be hauled out by Dr. Octopus in a way like a jamboree diversion; he inferred that, "This show keeps on leaving a few prime time live-activity shows to disgrace with regards to building serialized stories and has been a standout amongst the most lovely shocks of the TV season." 

Luke Bonanno of Ultimate Disney recorded "Response" as one of his best five most loved scenes of the main season, while remarking that "the uniform perfection of the parcel [makes] this a difficult assignment." Writing for DVD Talk, analyst Justin Felix opined that the scene was "especially activity pressed." Rob M. Worley of Mania depicted Dr. Octopus' presentation as "touchy," while commending MacNicol for adjusting such an overwhelming remaining task at hand between both the scene and different arrangement.