Francis William Reitz 

Francis William Reitz, Jr. (Swellendam, 5 October 1844 – Cape Town, 27 March 1934) was a South African legal advisor, legislator, statesman, marketing expert, and artist who was an individual from parliament of the Cape Colony, Chief Justice and fifth State President of the Orange Free State, State Secretary of the South African Republic at the time Boer War, and the primary leader of the Senate of the Union of South Africa. 

Reitz had an incredibly changed political and legal profession that went on for more than forty-five years and crossed four separate political substances: the Cape Colony, the Orange Free State, the South African Republic, and the Union of South Africa. Prepared as a legal advisor in Cape Town and London, Reitz began off in law practice and jewel prospecting before being named Chief Justice of the Orange Free State. In the Orange Free State Reitz assumed an imperative job in the modernisation of the legitimate framework and the state's regulatory association. In the meantime he was likewise noticeable in open life, getting associated with the Afrikaner language and culture development, and social life as a rule. He was a South African Freemason. 

Reitz was a prevalent identity, both for his legislative issues and his receptiveness. At the point when State President Brand abruptly passed on in 1888, Reitz won the presidential races unopposed. In the wake of being re-chosen in 1895, hence making a trek to Europe, Reitz fell truly sick, and needed to resign. In 1898, presently recouped, he was selected State Secretary of the South African Republic, and turned into a main Afrikaner political figure amid the Second Boer War. Hesitant to move loyalty to the British, Reitz went into willful outcast after the war finished. Quite a long while later he came back to South Africa and set up a law practice once more, in Pretoria. In the late 1900s he wound up engaged with governmental issues afresh, and upon the announcement of the Union of South Africa in 1910, Reitz was picked the principal leader of the Senate. 

Reitz was a vital figure in Afrikaner social life amid the greater part of his life, particularly through his lyrics and different productions. 

Francis William Reitz, Jr., was conceived in Swellendam on 5 October 1844, as the child of Francis William Reitz, Sr. MLC, display rancher, agrarian and legislator, and Cornelia Magdalena Deneys. He was the seventh tyke in a group of twelve. He grew up at Rhenosterfontein, the model homestead () of his dad, arranged on the fringes of the "Breederivier" (Broad River) in the Cape Colony. 

Reitz wedded twice. His first marriage (Cape Town 24 June 1874) was to Blanka Thesen (Stavanger, Norway, 15 October 1854 – Bloemfontein, 5 October 1887). She was the sister of Charles Wilhelm Thesen, and the little girl of Arnt Leonard Thesen, tradesman, and Anne Cathrine Margarethe Brandt. The Thesen family had settled in Knysna, Cape Colony, from Norway in 1869. The couple had seven children and one little girl. After the demise of his first spouse Reitz remarried (Bloemfontein, 11 December 1889) with Cornelia Maria Theresia Mulder (Delft, Netherlands, 25 December 1863 – Cape Town 2 January 1935), girl of Johannes Adrianus Mulder, typesetter, and Engelina Johanna van Hamme. At the season of her marriage Mulder was acting executive of the "Eunice Ladies' Institute" at Bloemfontein. With his second spouse he had six children and one girl. 

Deneys, his child, battled against the British in the Second Boer War, 

directed the First Battalion, Royal Scots Fusiliers amid World War I and filled in as a Member of the Union Parliament, Cabinet Minister, Deputy Prime Minister (1939–1943), and South African High Commissioner (1944) to the Court of St. James's. His book, "Commando: A Boer Journal of the Boer War", has for a long time been viewed as a standout amongst the best stories of war and experience in the English language. 

thumb 

Reitz got his soonest tutoring at home, from a tutor, and at a neighboring homestead. When he was nine years of age, he went to the Rouwkoop Boarding School in Rondebosch (Cape Town). Here he emerged for his scholastic accomplishments and was along these lines chosen Queen's Scholar by the Senate of the South African College in Cape Town. In the six years he spent at the College, in the wake of landing in 1857, he got an expansive training in expressions and sciences, and formed himself into a well-offset young fellow with clear authority characteristics. He moved on from South African College in September 1863 with what could be compared to a cutting edge four year certification in expressions and sciences. 

By at that point, Reitz had built up a distinct fascination for law, and he proceeded with his examinations at South African College, perusing law with educator F.S. Watermeyer. The last's passing just months after Reitz began working with him, made Reitz choose to proceed with his investigations in London, at the Inner Temple. It was a choice that required consultation, as his dad Mormon was seeking after his child to come back to the ranch in due time, and the money related circumstance of the family was not solid. Be that as it may, Reitz went to London, and completed his examinations effectively. He was called to the bar at Westminster on 11 June 1867. Amid his time in England Reitz wound up intrigued by governmental issues, and routinely gone to sessions of the House of Commons. Before coming back to South Africa he made a voyage through Europe. 

Back in South Africa, Reitz set up himself as an attorney in Cape Town, where he was called to the bar on 23 January 1868. 

To start with Reitz thought that it was difficult to bring home the bacon, as rivalry among legal counselors in Cape Town was very serious as of now. In any case, he prevailing with regards to becoming well known, because of his sharp legitimate personality and his social insight. Being a piece of the western Circuit Court of the Cape Colony gave him a great deal of involvement in an exceptionally brief time. In the meantime, Reitz sustained his political advantages by composing lead articles for the "Cape Argus" paper, for which he likewise gave an account of the procedures of the Cape Parliament and went about as agent proofreader. In 1870 Reitz moved his lawful practice to Bloemfontein in the Orange Free State. The revelation of precious stones on the banks of the Vaal River, Reitz thought, would prompt a development of lawful work and empower him to set up a flourishing practice. This was not to be, notwithstanding, and following a couple of months Reitz left Bloemfontein to set up as a precious stone miner in Griqualand West, where he purchased a little case close Pniel from the Berlin Missionary Society. This venture likewise demonstrated ineffective, and again after just a couple of months Reitz came back to Cape Town. This time, his Cape Town law practice was fruitful, incidentally in view of the British addition of the Orange Free State diamondfields (1871) and the financial flourishing this radiated for the Cape Colony. 

In 1873 Reitz was solicited to speak to the area from Beaufort West in the Cape Parliament. The day he sat down, 30 May, his dad, who was the agent for Swellendam, reported his retirement from the Assembly. As such huge numbers of Reitz's exercises up to that point, his parliamentary profession was brief. Just two months after the fact, President Johannes Brand of the Orange Free State offered Reitz the situation of director of the recently framed Appellate Court of the Orange Free State, in spite of the way that Reitz was not completely qualified ("entomb alia" excessively youthful). Reitz declined the idea thus, yet when another competitor likewise cannot, Brand demanded the selection of Reitz, and persuaded the Volksraad to designate him. 

With his arrangement to the legal executive of the Orange Free State, Reitz made his mark. His entry – now right around thirty years of age and simply wedded – in Bloemfontein in August 1874 was the beginning of a residency of twenty-one years, just as the beginning of a shining vocation, to be delegated with his decision as State President. 

Prior to the mid-1870s, the legal arrangement of the Orange Free State was fairly crude and indiscriminate in character, especially on the grounds that the greater part of the judges were lawfully unfit. The vast majority of the legal strategies were in the hands of region judges, the purported Landdrosts, whose fundamental undertaking was authoritative. Reitz's first errand was to enhance this circumstance, which he did with much force. Well inside his first year of residency the Volksraad passed an Ordinance, in which both an expert Circuit Court and a Supreme Court were called into being. Reitz turned into the main leader of the Supreme Court and thusly likewise the primary Chief Justice of the Orange Free State. Directly from the earliest starting point Reitz showed himself to be a warrior, restricting the Volksraad time and again, handling profoundly imbued political customs that hindered the modernisation of the legal framework, yet additionally contending energetically to get the compensations and benefits of state authorities improved. As a "provincial" – he was conceived in the Cape Colony after all – he needed to win the certainty of the Boer populace to have his thoughts acknowledged. This he did by going with the Circuit Court through the nation for more than ten years, obtaining knowledge into and compassion for their lifestyle and their frequently moderate and dependably God-dreading convictions. It helped that Reitz himself was a religious individual and that he had begun in life in the Afrikaans talking wide open of the Cape Colony. In the long run he turned into the image of "Afrikanerdom" for some Orange Free Staters. 

Institutionally, Reitz did much for the codification and audit of the laws of the Orange Free State. With his partners C.J. Vels, O.J. Truter, and J.G. Fraser Reitz distributed the first "Ordonnantie boek van lair Oranje Vrijstaat" (Ordinance Book of the Orange Free State) in 1877, making the demonstrations and statutes of the republic accessible to the bigger open. He additionally assumed a job in the modification of the constitution of the Orange Free State, as to articles on citizenship and the privilege to cast a ballot, was director of the examination advisory group for wannabe specialists, and added to the improvement of the jail framework and the locale organization. 

As of now in 1878, voices sounded for Reitz to keep running for the administration, however President Brand's position was still extremely solid and Reitz straightforwardly lauded his characteristics and wouldn't remain against him. In the late 1870s and mid 1880s the political temperature ran high in the Orange Free State. The extension of the South African Republic (Transvaal) by the British in 1877 and the First Anglo-Boer War of 1880–1881 in which that republic recovered its self-sufficiency affected profoundly on political suppositions in the Orange Free State. From one viewpoint there were the individuals who spread alert in the association with the British, on the other there built up a political development that emphatically engendered a (stirred) Afrikaner national awareness. Reitz was a piece of the last mentioned, and together with C.L.F. Borckenhagen, supervisor of the "Bloemfontein Express" paper, he composed a constitution for the Afrikaner Bond ("Afrikaner Union"), an ideological group initially set up by driving Afrikaner government officials in the Cape Colony, similar to Rev S.J. du Toit and his Genootskap van Regte Afrikaners ('Society of True Afrikaners') and Jan Hendrik Hofmeyr and the "Zuidafrikaansche Boeren Beschermings Vereeniging" ('South African Boer Protection Association'). Among the supporters of this new Afrikaner patriotism in the Orange Free State was likewise Reitz's successor, M.T. Steyn, at that point still a youthful legal advisor. The constitution was exhibited in April 1881, and a while later Reitz turned into the administrator of the Bond. His obvious political exercises earned Reitz analysis from the individuals who dreaded a breakdown of relations with the British. It is self-evident, be that as it may, that an unavoidable trend was blowing through the Boer republics and among the Afrikaners in the Cape Colony, which was to change Anglo-Boer relations radically. 

In the Orange Free State President Brand was one of the lawmakers who clutched an increasingly careful and combining strategy towards the British government at the Cape, keeping up severe lack of bias. In this position Brand pursued the propensity for a lifetime, and it earned him a British knighthood. Notwithstanding the changing political atmosphere and the polarization of political positions, Brand remained enormously prominent with the burghers of the Orange Free State. The presidential races of 1883 could on substance have turned into a political fight between the container Dutch Afrikaner Bond supporters and devotees of the Brand-line. In any case, Reitz, as the perfect skillet Dutch competitor, again would not remain against Brand. Just when Brand passed on in office five years after the fact, that was the ideal opportunity for change. Reitz stood competitor and won an avalanche triumph on the ticket of Afrikaner patriotism. He was introduced as state president in the "Tweetoringkerk" (Two-Towers Church) in Bloemfontein on 10 January 1889. 

As president Reitz was one of the primary Afrikaners to effectively build up a supposed "Bantu approach", in rationality and wording going past contemporary thoughts on isolation among white and dark. Under his administration Indian outsiders were by law prohibited to settle in the Orange Free State (1890). This prompted an encounter with the British government and a broad correspondence among Reitz and the British high magistrate in Cape Town, in which inward power was guaranteed and built up. 

In financial terms, the late 1880s were a time of development in the Orange Free State. Agribusiness got, and the railroad framework turned into a vital wellspring of salary also. Reitz was instrumental in the modernisation of cultivating, spreading new systems and a logical way to deal with the aversion of maladies. Here Reitz demonstrated to himself the plant growth specialist and model rancher his dad had been before him. 

Under Reitz's administration the new gathering corridor for the Volksraad, the purported "Vierde Raadszaal" (Fourth Council Hall) was opened (1893), and the new Government Building got a second floor (1895). Outside Bloemfontein the street organize got consideration. 

As could be normal, following he was introduced, Reitz reached the legislature of the South African Republic with the target to build up new and closer political ties. As of now on 4 March 1889 the Orange Free State and the South African Republic finished up an arrangement of regular safeguard at Potchefstroom. Bargains about exchange and the railroads were to pursue. Much prior, in January 1889, the Volksraad charged Reitz to arrange a traditions bargain with both the British South African provinces and the South African Republic. On 20 March 1889 a Customs Conference was held in Bloemfontein which prompted an understanding between the Orange Free State and the Cape Colony which was tremendously advantageous for the previous. The monetary advantages developed further when new railroad lines were opened between the Cape Colony and Bloemfontein (1890) and among Bloemfontein and Johannesburg (1892), straightforwardly interfacing Cape Town with Johannesburg and transforming the Orange Free State into a travel economy. For Reitz the improvement of a brought together South African railroad framework was likewise a political objective: the rail lines as a way to decrease common doubt and make solidarity and shared comprehension between the white populace of South Africa. 

Reitz's approaches were valued by the Volksraad, mirroring the adjustment in the inclination of the Afrikaner electorate towards Afrikaner patriotism. Months before the presidential decision of 1893 the Volksraad supported Reitz's candidature with a vote of forty-three against eighteen. Reitz acknowledged the underwriting depending on the prerequisite that he be permitted three months leave to Europe. On 22 November 1893 he was re-chosen, again with an avalanche larger part. 

The outing to Europe was a long way from only a family occasion. In Britain Reitz owned some solid open expressions, guarding the republican arrangement of government in South Africa and contradicting British mediation in 'Bantu issues'. On the landmass Reitz was gotten by a few heads of state and political pioneers. In October 1894 he returned in Bloemfontein. Not long after Reitz was determined to have hepatitis, which besides influenced his officially stressed nerves and prompted restlessness. The circumstance was serious to the point that he in the long run needed to leave the administration. The Volksraad acknowledged his acquiescence on 11 December 1895. 

In June 1896 Reitz ventured out to Europe yet again on a five-month outing to recuperate from his crippling disease. On his arrival to South Africa he set up himself in Pretoria in the South African Republic in July 1897, where he set up another law practice. 

Reitz did not remain a private individual for long in light of the fact that a contention between the South African Republic lawmaking body and legal executive brought about the rejection of the Chief Justice. Reitz then took up an arrangement as judge in mid 1898 and rapidly turned out to be a piece of the internal hover of the Transvaal organization. At the time the association with the British was at that point quickly weakening and the administration of the South African Republic was making a move to fortify its national and global position. One of the measures taken was to supplant State Secretary W.J. Leyds, who had the Dutch nationality, with a South African. Leyds was delegated Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary in Europe to speak to the Republic abroad. Reitz had his spot as State Secretary in June 1898, after Abraham Fischer had declined. 

As State Secretary Reitz had a confounded and robust occupation. After the State President he was the most essential individual from the Executive Council ("Uitvoerende Raad"). As the most senior government employee he was in charge of the oversight over the usage of the laws and guidelines, just as for all the correspondence of the President, official government reports, and so on. He was likewise a go between the Executive Council and parliament, the First and Second Volksraad, and a key figure in the outside undertakings of the State. Experienced and efficient as he himself was Reitz figured out how to rapidly modernize the structure of the state mechanical assembly, by actualizing guidelines for the running of the administration divisions, designating a filer for his own, and by endorsing that all correspondence with the legislature ought to be in Dutch. 

The State President of the South African Republic, Paul Kruger, was not a simple man to work with, and in certain circles it was anticipated that Reitz would rapidly wind up subjected to Kruger. This was not the situation, notwithstanding. Every so often the two men conflicted on issues of arrangement, however Reitz stayed consistent with his own feelings, increasing some impact over Kruger all the while. Initially adulated by the British for his conciliatory cordiality, their demeanor immediately changed when they comprehended that Reitz was a hero of Transvaal freedom. Reitz was here and there fairly baldfaced in his political proclamations, so when he – erroneously – asserted the South African Republic to be a completely sovereign express, the British hopped on him. 

In perspective on quickly mounting British weight and a resulting furnished clash over the situation of the Uitlanders and monetary authority over the Witwatersrand gold fields, remote approach in the South African Republic was in the end controlled by a triumvirate: State President Kruger, State Secretary Reitz, and State Attorney General J.C. Mucks. Amid 1899 they chose that a hostile frame of mind towards British requests was the main path forward, in spite of the dangers this involved. Reitz looked for and got the help of the Orange Free State for this methodology. On 9 October 1899 the South African Republic and the Orange Free State issued a joint final proposal to the British government to withdraw their requests. 

The British government did not surrender to the final proposal, and after two days, on 11 October 1899, the Second Anglo-Boer War (South African War) broke out. At the point when the British armed force walked on Pretoria in May 1900, the legislature was compelled to escape the capital. From that minute on, Reitz was in charge of the persistent movement of its seat all through the Transvaal, which happened sixty-two times until March 1902. In May of that year, Reitz took a functioning part in the harmony arrangements with the British, and he was one of the signatories of the Treaty of Vereeniging, marked in Pretoria on 31 May 1902. 

Albeit instrumental in drafting the Treaty of Vereeniging, Reitz by and by did not have any desire to swear devotion to the British government, and he went into outcast. On 4 July 1902 he left South Africa and joined his significant other and youngsters in the Netherlands. To mitigate his budgetary inconveniences, Reitz set out on an address visit in the United States. Because of a melting away enthusiasm for the Boer cause since the war was finished, the visit fizzled, driving Reitz to come back to the Netherlands. Here his wellbeing fizzled him once more, prompting hospitalization and a broad time of convalescing. Amid this time he was upheld by his companions W.J. Leyds and H.P.N. Muller and the "Nederlandsch Zuid-Afrikaansche Vereeniging" (Dutch South-African Society). 

In 1907, after the old Boer republics got self-government, and in the run-up to the development of the Union of South Africa, driving Afrikaner legislators J.C. Mucks and L. Botha asked Reitz to come back to South Africa and assume a job in governmental issues once more. Together with his better half, he built up himself in Sea Point, Cape Town. In 1910, effectively sixty-six years of age, he was named leader of the Senate of the recently framed Union of South Africa. 

These were no simple years, once more, as previous Afrikaner comrades found each other on opposite sides of the political fence, in a quickly evolving world. As in his prior life, Reitz remained a man of candid feelings, which he circulated openly. All things considered, he clashed with the Smuts government, and in 1920 he was not re-delegated as leader of the Senate. He remained an individual from that House until 1929, in any case. 

As a vital open figure, Reitz was regarded and recollected in various ways. In 1923 Reitz the University of Stellenbosch gave on him a privileged doctorate in law for his open administrations. As of now in 1889, a town was named after him in the Orange Free State. In 1894 one additionally named a town after his second spouse, Cornelia. A ship named after him, the "President Reitz", sank off Port Elizabeth in 1947. The Jubilee Diamond, found in the Free State town of Jagersfontein in 1895 was initially named the Reitz Diamond, yet renamed out of appreciation for the sixtieth commemoration of the royal celebration of Queen Victoria in 1897. 

When he at long last resigned from open life, Reitz moved to Gordon's Bay, yet came back to Cape Town quite a while later, where he had a house in Tamboerskloof and was dealt with by his little girl Bessie, a restorative specialist. He stayed dynamic as far as possible with composing and interpreting. Reitz kicked the bucket at his home "Botuin" on 27 March 1934, and got a state burial service three days after the fact, with a memorial service at the "Grote Kerk". He was covered at the Woltemade graveyard at Maitland. 

Reitz was a critical figure in Afrikaner social life. He was an artist, and distributed numerous sonnets in Afrikaans, making him a forebear of the improvement of Afrikaans as a social language. Accordingly he identified with the Genootskap van Regte Afrikaners ("Society of Real Afrikaners"), built up in the Cape Colony in 1875. In spite of the fact that he never turned into a part himself, he was a functioning supporter of the general public's diary, "Kick the bucket Suid-Afrikaansche Patriot". With his scholarly work, Reitz was positively tied down in the alleged First Afrikaans Language Movement, in spite of the fact that he was less keen on the instructional drive of that development than recorded as a hard copy in Afrikaans as an absolutely social action. Quite a bit of his work depended on English writings, which he deciphered, altered, and adjusted. In the process he created totally new masterpieces. 

For Reitz, Afrikaans was prevalently a language of culture, not of government, where he spread the utilization of the official language of the Boer republics, Dutch. Amid his administration of the Orange Free State, where the utilization of English was huge among the burghers, he firmly advanced the utilization of Dutch, against government officials like John G. Fraser and other people who were agreeable to English. 

Institutionally, Reitz advanced the establishment of the "Letterkundige en Wetenschappelijke Vereeniging" (Literary and Scientific Society) of the Orange Free State, of which he was director for some time, the library at Bloemfontein, and the National Museum of the Orange Free State. 

"(Rundown inadequate)" 

At the approach of the South African War (Second Anglo-Boer War), F.W. Reitz, in his ability of State Secretary of the South African Republic, distributed a diagram of Anglo-Boer relations in the nineteenth century in Dutch, under the title "Eene eeuw van onrecht". The book was a vital promulgation report in the war. 

The real initiation of the book is hazy. The second Dutch release of the book conveyed the content 'Operation last van sanctum staatssekretaris der Z.A.R., F.W. Reitz' ('By request of the State Secretary of the S.A.R., F.W. Reitz'). J.C. Mucks is demonstrated as writer, yet most likely just altered the presentation and the finish of the book, in co-activity with E. J. P. Jorissen. The remainder of the content was likely arranged by J. de Villiers Roos. 

In 1900, interpretations showed up in German and English. The English interpretation just conveyed the name of Reitz, and has an introduction by W.T. Stead. The English release contained more material than the first Dutch version (see number of pages).