Skirmish of Vijithapura 

The Battle of Vijithapura was an unequivocal and significant fight in the crusade did by Sri Lankan ruler Dutthagamani against the attacking South Indian lord Ellalan. The fight is reported in detail in the antiquated narratives of the nation. In any case, they just give the perspective of Dutthagamani and his military, and subtleties are rare on Elara's side. 

Subsequent to propelling a battle to recover the nation from Elara, Dutthagamani caught some of his fortifications before going to the invigorated city of Vijithapura. A four-month attack resulted, trailed by an extensive ambush where Dutthagamani's bosses and imperial elephant had a noteworthy influence. The annals center a great deal around these ten bosses, and clearly portray some irregular "tests" that Dutthagamani did to discover their abilities. 

The fight finished in triumph for Dutthagamani's powers and significantly debilitated Elara's military, eventually prompting his annihilation and passing. The accurate area of Vijithapura is obscure, however students of history have made a few theories on this. The fight is still viewed by Sri Lankans as an amazing occasion in the nation's history, and has even been contrasted and triumphs of the Sri Lanka Army amid the nation's affable war. 

Dutthagamani's battle against Elara is given in detail in the old annals of Sri Lanka; "Mahavamsa", "Dipavamsa", "Rajavaliya" and "Thupavamsa". Every one of them portray the fight in detail, and apply a high significance to it. Dutthagamani is a legend in these annals, and his crusade is portrayed as a "blessed war" went for reestablishing Buddhism in the nation. In this manner, these records are positively one-sided to him, and the depiction of the Battle of Vijithapura, alongside the remainder of the crusade, is a blend of reality and legend. Nonetheless, students of history concur that the essential certainties from these annals are exact. The uneven records given in the narratives imply that there is almost no data to be acquired on Elara and his armed forces. As indicated by Orientalist Wilhelm Geiger, who interpreted the "Mahavamsa", the issue is "not what is said but rather what is left implied". 

At the season of the fight, Ellalan was the ruler of Anuradhapura. He was a Chola sovereign from South India, who had vanquished the Sinhalese ruler Asela in an intrusion. Despite the fact that an intruder, Elara is depicted as an equitable ruler who had even belittled Buddhism. The majority of the nation went under this Tamil lord's standard, while his adversary Kavan Tissa, a Sinhala ruler from Ruhunu in the south of the nation, composed an obstruction against him. Kavan Tissa's child, Dutthagamani, climbed to the position of royalty after the passing of his dad. 

Not long after he turned into the ruler in Ruhuna, Dutthagamani propelled a crusade against Elara with the expectation of "reestablishing and extolling Buddhism" in the nation. Subsequent to setting out from Magama and intersection the Mahaweli waterway, Dutthagamani caught various fortresses and urban areas that were under Elara, and slaughtered a few of his officers. The antiquated annals allude to the majority of the chieftains or commanders crushed by Dutthagamani as "Demalas" (Tamils). In any case, it is far-fetched that every one of them were without a doubt Tamils, and it is conceivable that one of them—whose name is given as Dighabaya—may even have been a stepbrother of Dutthagamani himself who had later joined Elara. 

After these triumphs, Dutthagamani's military walked on to the "extraordinary post of Vijithapura". Dutthagamani pursued a street among Sigiriya and Minneriya to take his military there; a street that had been utilized by Pandukabhaya, a past ruler, in his military crusades too. 

The city of Vijithapura, which the "Mahavamsa" alludes to as Vijitha Nagara, had been established almost three hundred years prior by the brother by marriage of ruler Panduvasudeva. When of the fight, it had turned into a well-strengthened fortification of Elara. It is said to have been encompassed by three canals and a divider with a stature of 18 cubits. The divider had four created iron entryways on the north, south, east and west. The "Rajavaliya" depicts Vijithapura as a post second just to Anuradhapura. 

The control of Vijithapura was basic to the two sides. The loss of the fortification would be a generally unsettling component for Elara's powers and would essentially lessen their capacity to oppose Duthhagamani's development. For Dutthagamani's powers, the catch of the city would imply that they could without much of a stretch proceed onward to Anuradhapura. 

Enduring troops of Elara's powers from past fights withdrew to Vijithapura, further fortifying its barriers. Dutthagamani's military additionally arrived and set up a campsite near the post. The open stretch of land where they stayed outdoors later came to be known as Khandavara Pitthi or Kandavurupitiya. They did customary ambushes against the post while the safeguards likewise made intermittent fights, yet none of them had the capacity to influence the fight for either side. In the wake of laying attack on the city for four months, plans were laid to dispatch an ambush utilizing the whole armed force. Dutthagamani's military was driven by his ten victors or officers, known as the "Ten Giant Warriors", who were to have a huge impact in the fight to come. 

The antiquated accounts notice two tests that Dutthagamani intended to discover these warriors' ability before the fight. For the main test, Dutthagamani requested that the warriors drink an expansive cauldron of hard stuff, expecting to test their quality. At the point when all others cannot, Suranimala ventured forward and drank the whole cauldron with no exertion. The second test was to test Nandimithra, the leader of the military. Dutthagamani had his imperial elephant, Kandula, rankled and set on Nandimithra. Be that as it may, the warrior held fast and taking the elephant by its tusks, pushed it to the ground. Therefore clearing all questions with regards to the capacities and expertise of his warriors, Dutthagamani sounded the war drums and raising his banners, began the ambush to take Vijithapura. 

Dutthagamani's military assaulted every one of the four entryways of the city at the same time. He drove the fundamental ambush on the southern door with Nandimithra, Suranimala and the elephant Kandula, while the assaults on the northern and western entryways were driven by Bharana, Khanjadeva, Phussadeva and Labhiyavasabha. The eastern door was assaulted by Mahasona, Gothaimbara, Theraputthabhaya and Velusumana. The protectors of the eastern doors were directed by Velusumana after a rangers assault, and Elara's powers pulled back into the city. 

Elara's toxophilite, shooting from the dividers, caused overwhelming setbacks on the aggressors, while troopers over the dividers counteracted any endeavor to rupture the divider by pouring down liquid metal on them. The elephant Kandula, endeavoring to break the southern door, was harmed in such an assault. In the wake of watching out for his wounds and securing him utilizing thick creature conceals, Dutthagamani supported Kandula and drove him against the divider. The divider was broken and Dutthagamani's military entered the city. The ten heroes, reluctant to enter through an opening made by another, devastated the divider themselves in better places and broke into the city. Driven by them, Dutthagamani's military demolished the safeguards and assumed responsibility for the fortification city of Vijithapura. The survivors withdrew to Anuradhapura. 

The catch of Vijithapura made ready for Dutthagamani's military to progress on to Anuradhapura, and they continued promptly a short time later, catching two a greater amount of Elara's fortresses in transit. In the fight for Anuradhapura, Dutthagamani executed Elara in single battle and turned into the lord of Anuradhapura, bringing the whole nation under his standard. 

The clash of Vijithapura is an incredible fight in Sri Lankan history and a critical achievement in Dutthagamani's battle to reestablish Buddhism in the nation. It is regularly alluded to as "Vijithapura maha satana" (the extraordinary clash of Vijithapura). After the closure of the Sri Lankan Civil War in 2009, General Sarath Fonseka, the then leader of the Sri Lanka Army, contrasted a few fights they battled with that of Vijithapura. 

The accurate area of the Vijithapura fortification is questionable. A town with a similar name close to the old Kalawewa supply may have been where the fight occurred. There is an old sanctuary here just as a rock stone that local people accept to have been utilized by Dutthagamani's officers to hone their swords However, different history specialists and archeologists trust that the area is near Kaduruwela close Polonnaruwa, where the remnants of an old post have been found.