Kimberley Joseph 

Kimberley Joseph (brought into the world August 30, 1973) is a Canadian Australian on-screen character who is situated in the United States. Joseph was conceived in Canada, raised on the Gold Coast in Australia and taught in Switzerland. Subsequent to coming back to Australia, she started a degree at Bond University however dropped out at 19 years old when she was cast in the cleanser musical drama "Heaven Beach". She had no formal acting preparing yet showed up in the cleanser for the year and a half it was delivered. After "Heaven Beach" finished, she had easygoing work on "Hello Hey It's Saturday" before co-facilitating the prominent Seven Network arrangement "Fighters". 

After three arrangement of "Combatants", Joseph was anxious to come back to acting, so played the job of lowlife Joanne Brennan in "Home and Away" from 1995 to 1996. In 1999, she moved to the United States to ponder acting at the Atlantic Theater Company in New York City, at that point went through year and a half fruitlessly trying out for jobs in Los Angeles. In 2001, she was given a role as Jo Ellison in the British TV arrangement "Cold Feet". She showed up in the fourth and fifth arrangement and came back to Australia two days in the wake of shooting the last scene in 2002. In 2004, she showed up in a noteworthy repeating job as Dr. Elegance Connelly in six scenes of the Australian cleanser musical show "All Saints". She came back to America subsequent to recording "All Saints", where she got a little job as airline steward Cindy Chandler in the pilot scene of "Lost". The job should be an erratic in the pilot yet a maker preferred Joseph and the character, so brought her back for a common job in the second, third and 6th seasons. Far from acting, Joseph has been engaged with endeavors to feature the impacts of Soviet atomic testing in Kazakhstan, including coordinating a short film. 

Kimberley Joseph was conceived on August 30, 1973 in Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada to Joe and Wendy. Joe, a Canadian specialist, met Wendy, an Australian air master, while she was in Canada. At the point when Kimberley was three years of age, the family moved to Australia's Gold Coast, where she went to St Hilda's School for the following nine years. The family voyaged widely in Europe, and Kimberley went to a tuition based school in Montreux, Switzerland for a long time. While there, she figured out how to communicate in French and Spanish. When she came back to Australia, she began a degree in expressions and trade at Bond University, however did not finish it. 

At 19 years old, Joseph dropped out of University in the wake of getting the piece of Cassie Barsby in the cleanser musical drama "Heaven Beach". In the same way as other of the cast, she had no formal acting preparing, however she made this advantageous for her with "richness and vitality". Joseph increased acting background and fellowships with Raelee Hill, Megan Connolly, and Isla Fisher, however the arrangement was dropped after just year and a half. After "Heaven Beach" finished, she started showing up in the Nine Network theatrical presentation "Hello Hey It's Saturday". Joseph had no agreement with Nine, and was showing up out of consideration for her companion, have Daryl Somers. Nine Network administrators needed to make her a customary on the show and started utilizing her in exposure material. Be that as it may, rival organize Seven offered her an agreement to co-have "Warriors" before Nine could make her "Hello Hey" contract changeless. Her absconding to Seven of every 1995 caused a little embarrassment. She depicted facilitating "Warriors" as "extreme and frightening" by virtue of the live gathering of people. She showed up for three seasons and some universal specials before playing the job of Joanne Brennan in "Home and Away" with an end goal to make tracks in an opposite direction from displaying. The character, a secretary who managed medications to younger students, showed up from 1995 to 1996. She left the cleanser with the likelihood of coming back to the character later. Close by her job in "Home and Away", she showed up in a play with Geoffrey Hughes. 

Until 1999, she kept functioning as a "jobbing on-screen character", showing up in "" and "Clearance of the Century", and "Stories of the South Seas". Anxious to move far from cleanser musical drama acting, Joseph moved to the United States to consider acting with the Atlantic Theater Company in New York City. She at that point moved to Los Angeles, where she went through year and a half living off her funds endeavoring to get tryouts. In those year and a half, her solitary occupations were a solitary business and a vocation talking with LA-based film on-screen characters for Australian TV. In 2001, her attorney educated her that she would need to make a trip to Sydney, Australia to be met for her green card. On the day she was because of fly back to Australia, her specialist educated her regarding a tryout for the British TV arrangement "Cold Feet", whose maker was searching for an Australian performing artist to turn into another fundamental cast part. After two weeks she had moved to Manchester, England and was doing content perused throughs with the remainder of the cast. Her character, Jo Ellison, showed up in all scenes of the fourth and fifth arrangement. Two days in the wake of taping the last scene in 2002, Joseph left Britain and came back to Australia. 

In 2004, she showed up on Australian TV out of the blue since 1999, playing Dr. Elegance Connelly in six scenes "All things considered". The day after she finished taping of her scenes, she came back to Los Angeles for the pilot season. She got a little part as an airline steward in the pilot scene of "Lost". Joseph's scenes, on a plane set, were recorded more than over two days in Los Angeles. An early content draft of the pilot required her character to be seen dead on a shoreline, however ensuing revamps evacuated the scene. A maker preferred Joseph and her character, and intended to take both back to the arrangement sometime in the not too distant future. She returned toward the start of the second season, when it was uncovered that her character, given the name Cindy Chandler, had endure the plane accident in the pilot scene alongside different travelers from the tail area of the plane. Regardless of being asked not to change her appearance a lot after the pilot, Joseph had her hair style, so in her initial couple of scenes of the second season she needed to "experience the entire disaster of putting a Rambo scarf around [her] head, which just looked strange." Her scenes for season two were recorded more than five weeks and were communicated in 2005. Her character was kidnapped amidst a scene and was not seen again until in the third season, when Joseph repeated the job for two scenes and the whereabouts of her character are uncovered. Joseph continued the job for the 6th and last season in 2010. 

Joseph likewise shot minor jobs in two Ron Howard films; in "Ice/Nixon" (2008), she depicted tennis victor Evonne Goolagong, and she had a minor job in "Blessed messengers and Demons" (2009). In spite of the fact that of an alternate ethnicity to Goolagong, she was thrown in "Ice/Nixon" since she had the "right look". Both of her scenes were cut from the movies before discharge. 

In 2011 Joseph showed up in TV advertisements for HughesNet, the satellite-based Internet Service Provider. 

In 2013, Joseph showed up in Linkin Park's music video for their single "Manor of Glass". Joseph played the dispossessed spouse of a perished Navy SEAL. 

Joseph lives in Los Angeles, where she is based for acting. She has been engaged with Aid International activities featuring the impacts of Soviet atomic testing in Semey, Kazakhstan. In 2003 she visited the zone with Scottish MEP Struan Stevenson, where she captured casualties of radiation harming. The photos were shown in the Scottish Parliament working in 2004 and distributed in Stevenson's book "Crying Forever" in 2006. She came back to the region with Stevenson in July 2008 and has building up a narrative film to pull in global regard for the territory. The 13-minute film, entitled "When the Dust Settles", debuted on 12 November 2009 at the Birch Carroll and Coyle film in Southport, Queensland. 

Joseph and accomplice Scott Chrisman have a child, Gabriel, conceived in 2013.