Blown for Good 

Blown for Good: Behind the Iron Curtain of Scientology is a diary composed by Marc Headley, a previous Scientologist and Sea Org part, about his life and encounters in the Church of Scientology. It was independently published in the United States on November 5, 2009. 

Marc Headley was brought up in Los Angeles, California. Headley's mom was a Scientologist, and she raised him inside the congregation since the beginning. He started fill in as a worker for the congregation at age 16. Headley not long after joined the Sea Org and worked at the global central station of Scientology in Hemet, California, for a long time. Headley got away from the worldwide base camp of the association in 2006. He was escorted to the security of a vehicle rental shop by the police amid his break from the association. 

In "Headley v. Church of Scientology International", the ninth Circuit Court of Appeals expressed, "The record overwhelmingly demonstrates that the Headleys joined and intentionally worked for the [Sea Organization] on the grounds that they trusted that it was the proper activity, since they delighted in it, and in light of the fact that they felt that by working they were regarding the dedication that they each made and to which they followed." The court likewise noticed that the Headleys had private quarters outside the base, and approached vehicles and numerous chances to leave. 

In the wake of leaving the association, Headley expounded on his encounters in Scientology. His compositions were distributed in the media including news magazines, productions on the web and different sites. In 2008, Headley was welcome to talk in Hamburg, Germany, at a meeting examining maltreatment inside Scientology, nearby on-screen character and previous Scientologist Jason Beghe. In 2009, Headley lived in Los Angeles, California, with his significant other and two youngsters, where he opened a furnishings business. Headley keeps on standing up about his encounters in Scientology. 

The book's title is a reference to the Scientology expressions "blow" or "blown," which portray one who leaves Scientology without earlier approval from the association. 

Headley relates scenes from his years as an individual from the Church of Scientology, the majority of that time as a feature of the request called the Sea Organization, or Sea Org. He subtleties his encounters while working hundred-hour weeks at Scientology's disconnected global base camp known as Gold Base (or "Int Base") at Gilman Hot Springs, California, around eighty miles southeast of Los Angeles. 

The book incorporates a forward composed by previous high-positioning Scientology official Mark Rathbun. 

Headley worked out of the film-creation studio offices of Scientology from 1989 through 2005. He held numerous positions while utilized by Scientology at Gold Base, mostly centered around the creation of video and sound materials to scatter the message of Scientology author L. Ron Hubbard. He started contents of recordings to acquaint new individuals with Scientology philosophy. He likewise regulated expansive scale Scientology open occasions directed by Scientology's pioneer David Miscavige. Headley duplicated a large number of duplicates of sound chronicles of talks by Hubbard. 

The creator portrays a 2004 occasion where Tom Cruise was granted the association's Medal of Valor from David Miscavige, the video of which was spilled to the Internet in January 2008. At first, the video proposed for the occasion highlighted Cruise and different famous people including Will Smith showing up on camera and adulating the performing artist. Miscavige objected and taught Scientology staff to make a video where Cruise would talk about himself and his perspectives on being a Scientologist. "Dave Miscavige later said that his Tom Cruise video was a standout amongst the most vital recordings that had ever been created," composes Headley. 

Headley states he picked up endorsement to offer old Scientology materials on eBay to recover cash for the association – he was later blamed for misappropriation for doing this. In 2005, when he realized he would be looked with being sent to the association's jail like program the Rehabilitation Project Force, Headley chose to leave. Headley stressed that leaving Scientology would mean getting to be isolated from his significant other Claire, to whom he had been hitched for a long time, and other relatives as per the Scientology routine with regards to separation. Headley affirms that he left Gold Base on his bike yet was trailed by Scientology security monitors, which brought about Headley tumbling off his bicycle by the side of the street. Riverside County, California Sheriff's arrived, and they helped Headley securely make tracks in an opposite direction from the Scientology compound. From that point he headed out to his dad in Kansas City. He was later rejoined with his better half who had likewise been a worker at Gold Base. Preceding his significant other's takeoff from Gold Base, she was checked intently day and night by the association. 

The creator credits numerous hotspots for presenting questions about his conditions while living at Gold Base. He composes that he tuned in to "The John and Ken Show" on KFI, and that their dialog of Scientology enabled him to think all the more fundamentally amid his time at the compound. He says that survey Conan O'Brien ridicule Scientology VIPs changed his perspectives on people that the association had just talked about inside with love. 

Whenever Headley and a Danish film group went to the Gold Base, Headley was gone up against by a few individuals from Gold staff, including base representative Catherine Fraser, who said Headley's record of his getaway was untrue."Marc lived in somewhere else, not even on the property, somewhere else by and large," Fraser said in one of the [video clasps of the incident]. "What's more, that day when I disclosed that to the sheriff - the sheriff took a gander at me and stated, 'Gracious, you mean he could have left whenever?' I stated, 'Truly, he could have left whenever and he did.'" 

In the wake of auditing the proof, the ninth Circuit concurred with the Scientologists that the Headleys lived outside the base, they had numerous chances to leave the Gold staff, and they had no issue leaving on their first attempt. 

In a meeting on "The John and Ken Show" on KFI, Headley was inquired as to whether he encountered striking back from Scientology for talking fundamentally about the association. He said that he had been issued an announcement that he was to be considered a "Suppressive Person" by individuals from the association, and clarified, "That is fundamentally what goes out to anybody and everybody who is in Scientology, saying, 'This individual is a Suppressive Person, and you can never again address him until the end of time.' If you are in Scientology, and you address someone who is a Suppressive Person, you yourself can be pronounced a Suppressive Person." Headley said when he left Scientology the association gave him a "freeloader articulation", a bill for US$62,000, for courses he had gotten in Scientology. "It's really illicit, on the grounds that they are fundamentally charging me for hands on preparing – in California you can't charge someone for hands on preparing. It's of no genuine esteem, yet you don't have the foggiest idea about that, when you're in Scientology. You believe, 'Are they going to embellish my wages, are they going to sue me?' You don't have a clue," said Headley. 

The book was independently published November 5, 2009, and was made accessible through the writer's site at www.blownforgood.com and on Amazon.com. "Blown for Good" was chosen as a finalist in the 2009 "Book of the Year Awards", by "ForeWord Magazine". The Editor in head of "The Village Voice", Tony Ortega, depicted the book as a "momentous record". Ortega noticed, "Headley's story gives a cursing record of life working for Scientology ..." He finished up the audit by remarking, "Maybe the best administration that Headley furnishes with "Blown for Good" is giving non-Scientologists the feeling of what it's truly similar to work, all day every day, in such a peculiar association, from the lowliest worker messing out fertilizer in a Gold Base lake (Headley says poop was leaving his ears and pores for a considerable length of time) to what sort of extravagances the VIPs and high-positioning individuals appreciate." 

On the KFI talk radio program "The John and Ken Show", pundits John Kobylt and Ken Chiampou discussed "Blown for Good" and examined Scientology. Paul Beaumont, Toni O'Loughlin, and Paul Harris of "The Observer" remarked that Headley's book, "subtleties – as others have – claims of precise maltreatment and odd scenes" of encounters in Scientology. They noticed, "Headley's book pursues a year in which Scientology has been tormented by unwelcome disclosures from prominent turncoats and new media examination concerning its practices." "Catholic Online" partner manager and previous Archbishop of the Charismatic Episcopal Church, Randy Sly, portrayed "Blown for Good" as "a striking insider journal". Shrewd covered analysis of Scientology in the Australian Senate by Senator Nick Xenophon, and remarked, "Headley gives clear accountings of exercises inside Scientology that affirm the Australian Senator’s concerns." Sly noticed, "various remarks left on the Amazon.com site were from the individuals who shown they were ex-Scientologists and affirmed the author’s accounts." Ian Punnett of "Across the nation AM" remarked that the melody "We Gotta Get out of This Place", "surely would be a subject of a few of the sections of "Blown for Good"". 

Hamilton Nolan of "Ogler" portrayed the book's plan as "including a sensational, activity scene-type spread", and called the work "another tell-all book". "Star" depicted "Blown for Good" as a "touchy new book". Pete Samson of "The Sun" called the book "a noteworthy record of goings-on inside the congregation". The Flemish day by day paper distributed in Belgium, "De Standaard", noticed the book examines "momentous encounters" the writer experienced as a Scientology staff part. In a 2010 article in "New Humanist", Paul Sims noted, "Since its discharge toward the finish of a year ago, "Blown for Good" has had the sort of effect its writer trusted. Having developed an online buzz cordiality of Anonymous, and sold a huge number of duplicates in the US, Headley says he has been accepting letters and messages from Scientologists, huge numbers of whom have said the disclosures in his book have affirmed their doubts about the inward activities of the Church."