Million Dollar Challenge (TV program) 

Million Dollar Challenge (likewise alluded to as the PokerStars Million Dollar Challenge and PokerStars.net Million Dollar Challenge) is the most watched poker appear in TV history. It is supported by PokerStars. The show, which affectation on the Fox Broadcasting Company, appeared on October 11, 2009. The show is facilitated by Chris Rose and highlights Daniel Negreanu. The main season included five scenes following the FOX arrange Sunday National Football League inclusion. The finale broadcast on December 27, 2009. The eight-scene season 2 debuted on September 19, 2010 and is booked to finish up on December 12. 

Million Dollar Challenge is a poker amusement show where beginner poker players endeavor to vanquish famous people, proficient poker players and, in the long run, Daniel Negreanu so as to win the show's terrific prize, $1 million. In the first round, the beginner (with Negreanu next to them, going about as their mentor and loaning guidance) must annihilation a superstar, for example, Jayde Nicole, Jerome Bettis, Joanna Krupa, John Salley or Tito Ortiz. In the event that the hopeful can vanquish the VIP the challenger wins an excursion to the Bahamas and advances to the second round. In the second round, the beginner (with Negreanu now helping them from a sound verification corner, giving them guidance through a listening gadget in the novice's ear) must thrashing an expert poker player, for example, Vanessa Rousso, Barry Greenstein, Joe Cada or Chris Moneymaker. On the off chance that the competitor can overcome the expert the candidate wins $25,000 notwithstanding the trek to the Bahamas. Now, the novice has a choice to make. Fend off the cash and walk $25,000 more extravagant, or hazard the cash (the excursion is as yet all theirs) and play Daniel Negreanu sets out up toward $100,000, realizing that in the event that they lose they leave with only the outing to the Bahamas. In the season finale, the bosses from every scene go up against one another in a sit-n-go competition, the victor of which plays Negreanu for $1 million. 

The initial three scenes of the period were the three most-watched Poker network shows in U.S. history. The show broadcast on Sundays after the FOX National Football League inclusion. In the principal scene that circulated on October 11, hopeful Father Andrew Trapp crushed John Salley, Rousso and Negreanu, winning $100,000 and an outing to the Bahamas all the while, all of which he guaranteed to give to his congregation in Garden City, South Carolina. Trapp additionally won the opportunity to play in a smaller than normal competition (Episode 5), the victor of which would play Negreanu for $1,000,000. On October 18, after challenger Tracy Nguyen crushed Bettis and won a trek to the Bahamas, yet lost to Barry Greenstein, the following hopeful Sergeant Denny Luna vanquished Nicole, Moneymaker to win $25,000 and an outing to the Bahamas. Luna at that point left (and not hazard the $25,000 he had officially won) as opposed to confront Negreanu in the $100,000 coordinate. On the November 22 scene after contender Oluwasegun Odumuyiwa lost to Bettis, Brian Barboza crushed Nicole, Rousso and Negreanu, winning $100,000 and an excursion to the Bahamas. Barboza likewise won the opportunity to play in a smaller than usual competition, the champ of which would play Negreanu for $1,000,000. In December Joanna Krupa and Joe Cada were declared as recently included as VIP and expert rivals. Ortiz and Krupa showed up on the fourth scene, which disclosed on December 13. Cada showed up, yet he didn't play a hand. Dwayne Buth, playing for the benefit of the Cal State Fullerton wrestling group, lost to Ortiz. Mike Kosowski, a specialist on call amid the September 11 assaults lost to Krupa. The last airing of the challenge among the past victors was normal on December 27. Notwithstanding, when the hopefuls on the fourth scene all lost, a solitary table competition was held to decide the fourth challenger. Kosowski won and afterward bested Luna, Barboza and Trapp, in a specific order, in the Challenge of Champions for a $100,000 prize and an opportunity to play Negreanu for $1million. In three hands of heads up play, he bested Negreanu. 

Season two debuted on September 19 amid the second few days of the 2010 NFL season. The program will keep on airing on the FOX arrange as a friend to the NFL programming on the seven ends of the week that FOX does not have doubleheaders (September 19 and 26, October 10 and 24, November 7 and 21 and December 12). The show will air previously or after the football match-up contingent on the area of the nation. 

Proficient poker player Doyle Brunson has been disparaging of both "Million Dollar Challenge" and its contemporary opponent "Face the Ace" as horrendous shows far-fetched to draw watchers. Negreanu reacted, by means of blog, to this sort of analysis that the show isn't proposed for the genuine poker player, yet rather is gone for increasingly easygoing group of onlookers. There was some discussion about a poker playing minister on national TV that started religious discussion.