Stephen J. Chamberlin 

Stephen Jones Chamberlin (23 December 1889 – 23 October 1971) was a lieutenant general in the United States Army who served amid World War II as General of the Army Douglas MacArthur's Assistant Chief of Staff, G-3, the staff officer accountable for plans and tasks. 

Conceived in Spring Hill, Kansas on 23 December 1889, he was a 1912 alumni of the United States Military Academy at West Point, New York. Amid World War I, he was confidant to Major General David C. Shanks, the New York Port of Embarkation authority at Hoboken, New Jersey, for which he was one of twelve Army officers who got the Navy Cross. 

After the war, he went to the Command and General Staff School at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas, and served on the staff of the Chief of Infantry in the War Department. He went to the Army War College and was presented on the staff of the Army's Hawaiian Division at Fort Shafter, Hawaii, as Assistant Chief of Staff, G-3. 

In 1938, he ended up aide head of the Construction Branch in the G-4 Division of War Department General Staff. He wound up associated with the tremendous development program of arms stockpiles, terminals, airbases and beach front resistances as the United States rearmed before its entrance into World War II. 

In January 1942, he was sent to Australia, where he ended up Assistant Chief of Staff, G-3, at General MacArthur's General Headquarters (GHQ), Southwest Pacific Area. In this job, he was in charge of arranging and managing the execution of MacArthur's significant activities, including the New Guinea, Philippines and Borneo battles. 

Chamberlin was chief of the Intelligence Division, G-2, on the War Department General Staff from 1946 to 1948, when he moved toward becoming officer of the Fifth Army. He resigned in September 1951, and was then utilized as head of security for the US Air Force's Arnold Engineering Development Center at Arnold Air Force Base, Tennessee. He passed on 23 October 1971. 

Stephen Jones Chamberlin was conceived in Spring Hill, Kansas on 23 December 1889. He was delegated to the United States Military Academy at West Point, New York, which he entered on 2 March 1908 and from which he graduated on 12 June 1912. 

Chamberlin was charged a second lieutenant in the sixteenth Infantry, which was then positioned at the Presidio of San Francisco. In May 1914, the regiment moved to El Paso, Texas. He exchanged to the eighth Infantry on 1 February 1915 and served at Fort William McKinley in the Philippines. He was elevated to first lieutenant on 1 July 1916, turning into a legion aide on 14 October. He was right hand to the post officer from 31 October 1916 to 1 January 1917, and afterward Post Exchange Officer from 20 December 1916 to 9 June 1917. He was elevated to chief on 15 May 1917 and was acting Regimental Adjutant from 9 June to 1 September 1917. 

With the United States presently engaged with World War I, Chamberlin progressed toward becoming confidant to Major General David C. Shanks, the New York Port of Embarkation officer at Hoboken, New Jersey. Chamberlin was additionally the officer responsible for troop developments. On 2 March 1918, Chamberlin wedded Shank's little girl, Sarah Chapman, at St. Bartholomew's Episcopal Church, New York at the intersection of Madison Avenue and East 44th Street, in a straightforward function went to just by Sarah's sister Katherine and Captain Maxwell Sullivan as best man. 

Chamberlin was elevated to major on 7 June 1918. For his "recognized administration in the line of his calling as dispatch officer at the Port of Embarkation, Hoboken, New Jersey", he wound up one of just twelve Army officers to get the Navy Cross amid World War I. He was additionally granted the Distinguished Service Medal. His reference read: 

In September 1918, Shanks was delegated authority of the sixteenth Division at Camp Kearny, California, and Chamberlin was selected the division's Assistant Chief of Staff. To plan for the job, he went to a course at the Army War College. Following the Armistice with Germany, he was sent on a voyage through the front lines in France and Belgium. 

In the fallout of World War I, Chamberlin was diminished in rank to skipper on 9 February 1919, however was elevated to major again on 1 July 1920. After a year he was presented on the Panama Canal Zone, at first as transportation officer, and after that with 33rd Infantry. On coming back to the United States in January 1922, he joined the staff of nineteenth Infantry Brigade at Fort McPherson, Georgia. He was exchanged to the 22nd Infantry at Fort Benning, Georgia, on 17 February 1923. 

From 1924 to 1925, he went to the Command and General Staff School at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas, graduating as an Honor Graduate. Obligation at that point pursued with the Third Corps Area from 30 June to 5 July 1925; with the National Guard at Staunton, Virginia from 5 July 1925 to 1 July 1926; in the Office Chief of Infantry at Washington, D.C.; and at Camp Perry, Ohio as Publicity Officer. He served on the staff of the Chief of Infantry in the War Department from 1926 to 1930, and after that told a unit of the 22nd Infantry from 1930 to 1932. 

Chamberlin went to the Army War College from July 1932 to June 1933. Upon graduation, he was presented on the staff of the Army's Hawaiian Division at Fort Shafter, Hawaii, filling in as Assistant Chief of Staff, G-3. After over 15 years as a noteworthy, he was at long last elevated to lieutenant colonel on 1 August 1935. On coming back to the United States in July 1936, he wound up Assistant Professor of Military Science and Tactics for the secondary schools of Los Angeles. 

In 1938, Chamberlin wound up Assistant Chief of the Construction Branch in the G-4 Division of War Department General Staff. As of now, the United States was setting out on a military development in light of a declining global circumstance, which finished in the flare-up of World War II on 1 September 1939. A noteworthy part of this development was a huge development program of munititions stockpiles, stops, airbases and waterfront barriers. Some $175 million was designated to development under the Expansion Program, as it wound up known. 

On 7 May 1940, the Assistant Chief of Staff, G-4, Major General Richard C. Moore, G-4 of the War Department General Staff, requested a gauge of the expense to house an extra 1,200,000 men and shied away from the gauge he got of $800 per head. To save money on the expense of cantonments, Moore chose not to paint them. Chamberlin differ in light of the fact that paint would decrease support costs. President Franklin Roosevelt mediated and coordinated that the structures be painted. Subsequently, a request was set for of paint, bringing about a $11 million spending setback. Chamberlin was elevated to colonel on 14 February 1941. Remarking after the war on the development program, he composed: 

In January 1942, Chamberlin was named Assistant Chief of Staff, G-4, of US Army Forces in Australia, landing via air from Washington, D.C., on 9 January. He before long wound up Chief of Staff of US Army Forces in Australia, first under Major General Julian F. Barnes, and after that under his successor, Lieutenant General George H. Brett. Chamberlin was elevated to brigadier general on 15 February 1942. General Douglas MacArthur touched base in Australia on 17 March to end up Supreme Commander of the recently settled Southwest Pacific Area (SWPA), which currently incorporated the US Army Forces in Australia. On 19 April, MacArthur formally settled his General Headquarters (GHQ), and Chamberlin was selected its Assistant Chief of Staff, G-3. 

As G-3, Chamberlin was a standout amongst the most profoundly evaluated individuals from the GHQ staff, in spite of the fact that not being a piece of the "Bataan Gang" – the gathering of officers who had gotten away with MacArthur from the Philippines – made him something of an outcast at GHQ. Chamberlin was in charge of arranging and directing the execution of MacArthur's real tasks, including the New Guinea, Philippines and Borneo crusades. One individual from the staff later reviewed: 

Chamberlin enviously protected his position. In late 1943, Chamberlin varied with one of his organizers, Brigadier General Bonner Fellers, over a proposed arriving at Hansa Bay. Fellers imagined that Hansa Bay could be circumvent, however Chamberlin felt this would be excessively unsafe. While Fellers was a newcomer to GHQ, he had known MacArthur for a long time, and Fellers took his proposition straightforwardly to MacArthur, who endorsed it. An irate Chamberlin had Fellers terminated from G-3. MacArthur made him his military secretary. 

One of Chamberlin's difficulties was working with the Australians. Their decentralized method of arranging was completely unique in relation to the top-down methodology utilized by GHQ, and Chamberlin discovered this a wellspring of dissatisfaction, as it was hard to separate data from them. In any case, he built up a decent working association with the Australian Deputy Chief of the General Staff, Lieutenant General Frank Berryman. 

At the point when MacArthur started searching for another head of staff to supplant Lieutenant General Richard K. Sutherland in 1945, he considered however dismissed giving the post to Chamberlin. Chamberlin moved toward becoming Deputy Chief of Staff in February 1946, and was quickly going about as Chief of Staff from 2 May to 10 June 1946. For his administrations in the Southwest Pacific and the Occupation of Japan, Chamberlin was granted three Army Distinguished Service Medals and the Silver Star. In September 1946, he was one of five American significant officers who was made a privileged Commander of Order of the British Empire in the Military Division for his work with US Army Forces in Australia and GHQ SWPA. 

From June 1946 to October 1948 Chamberlin was executive of the Intelligence Division, G-2, on the War Department General Staff. He directed the Fifth Army from 1948 to 1951, getting advancement to lieutenant general on 24 January 1948. In 1949, he was director of a general officer advisory group which inquired about the job of race in the Army, and created a report supporting the continuation of isolation and the upkeep of a share constraining the quantity of African-Americans who could serve in uniform. 

He resigned in September 1951, and was then utilized as head of security for the US Air Force's Arnold Engineering Development Center at Arnold Air Force Base, Tennessee. He kicked the bucket at Hoag Memorial Hospital in Newport Beach, Orange, California on 23 October 1971. He was covered in Section 3, Site 1968 A WH of Arlington National Cemetery. His better half Sarah was thusly entombed with him in 1975. His papers are in the US Army Heritage and Education Center in Carlisle, Pennsylvania.