Robinson's Arch 

Robinson's Arch is the name given to a stupendous staircase conveyed by a surprisingly wide stone curve, which once remained at the southwestern corner of the Temple Mount. It was worked as a major aspect of the development of the Second Temple started by Herod the Great toward the finish of the first century BCE. Ongoing discoveries recommend that it might not have been finished until somewhere around 20 years after his demise. The gigantic stone range was developed alongside the holding dividers of the Temple Mount. It conveyed traffic up from antiquated Jerusalem's Lower Market region and over the Tyropoeon road to the Royal Stoa complex on the esplanade of the Mount. The bridge was demolished amid the Great Jewish Revolt, just a couple of decades after its finishing. 

The curve is named after Biblical researcher Edward Robinson who distinguished its remainders in 1838. Robinson distributed his discoveries in his milestone work "Scriptural Researches in Palestine", in which he draw the association with an extension portrayed in Josephus' "Artifacts of the Jews" and "The Jewish War", inferring that its reality demonstrates the relic of the Walls of Jerusalem. Unearthings amid the second 50% of the twentieth century uncovered the two its motivation and the degree of its related structures. Today the significant enduring bits of the old bridge complex might be seen by people in general inside the Jerusalem Archeological Park. As it is neighboring Jerusalem's Western Wall venerate region, a bit is utilized by certain gatherings as a position of petition. 

Robinson's Arch was developed as a component of King Herod's redesign and extension of the Second Temple, reported in 20–19 BCE. It was worked to connect the Tyropoeon Valley road, a noteworthy traffic course in the Second Temple Period, with the Royal Stoa at the southern end of the Temple Mount stage. 

The site adjoins a noteworthy old crossing point. Inverse lay an expansive open square fronting the Temple's principle Hulda Gates. The Tyropoeon road itself was fixed with shops and framed piece of the city's Lower Market. The Royal Stoa, an especially huge basilica complex which served different business and lawful capacities, looked down on the convergence from on the Temple stage. Despite the fact that the Stoa remained on the Temple esplanade, it was built upon an extension included by Herod. It was hence clearly not thought about holy by some at the time, enabling it to be utilized for unremarkable exercises. The overwhelming open traffic to and from this building represents the width of the ventured road, which approximates that of an advanced four-path roadway. 

Parts of an entryway once situated at the highest point of the bridge have been recuperated. From these, the door's width has been determined at . Because of the couple of surviving door remainders, it has not been set up whether there may have been more than one entryway. There may have been a solitary entryway, a twofold door, or even a triple door opening into the Royal Stoa complex now. This was one of four doors along the western mass of the compound: 

The regular perspective on present day archeologists is to figure the checking of these four entryways (for example 1, 2, 3 and 4) from left to appropriate, as one would include in Western social orders, making Robinson's Arch the fourth and toward the end straight, checking from left to right. The inquiry, nonetheless, which emerges is whether Josephus, a Hebrew who was acquainted with figure numbered objects while tallying them from appropriate to left, planned that this entryway should, truth be told, be the main door referenced in his depiction of the entryways driving into the Temple Mount fenced in area on its western side. 

As indicated by the Mishnah ("Middot" 1:3), an abridgment of oral lessons got and accumulated by Rabbi Judah the Prince in 189 CE, just a single entryway on the western side of the Temple Mount was entirely use and "served for coming in and for going out," specifically, the "Kiponus Gate". Different doors, apparently, had been fixed prior. It is of particular significance that Josephus takes note of that of the doors incorporated with the western walled in area of the Temple Mount, there was an extension that likewise rose to one of these entryways and which same scaffold was severed by the guerillas amid their war with Rome, probably the scaffold prompting the main functional door. 

The curve was worked as a component of the Temple Mount's gigantic western holding divider, which shapes its eastern help. The voussoirs spring from a column of impost squares which were sliced to create a dentil design. There have been a few hypotheses which conjecture that the dentils were utilized as a component of a framework used to shore up timber shapes utilized amid development. Nonetheless, this was a typical ornamental component utilized in the locale at the time, and archeologists have noticed that in this area of restricted woodlands almost certainly, stuffed earth, as opposed to costly timbers, was utilized to help the structure on which the curve was built. 

Upon finishing the curve spread over and had a width of . The ventured road it bore over a progression of seven extra curves was more than long. Robinson's Arch itself remained toward the north of the southwestern corner of the Temple Mount's holding divider, taking off some over the antiquated Tyropoeon road that once kept running along the Temple Mount's western divider. It was among the most enormous stone curves of traditional artifact. 

In spite of the fact that Herod's remodel of the Second Temple was started in late first century BCE, unearthings underneath the road close to the curve uncovered three oil lights of a sort basic in the main century CE and 17 recognizable coins, a few of which were struck by Valerius Gratus, Roman procurator of Judea, in the year 17/18 CE. This implies the curve and close-by segments of the Western Wall were developed after this date. 

The obliteration of Robinson's Arch happened amid the occasions encompassing the Roman sacking of Jerusalem in 70 CE. It has customarily been accused on the Roman armies which devastated the Temple Mount fenced in area and in the end set flame to the whole city. All the more as of late, this has been ascribed to the Zealot groups which had wrested control of the Temple Mount and invigorated it preceding its fall. A portion of these kept on holding out in Jerusalem's Upper City for a month after the city had been broken by the Romans. By destroying the bridge, just as the viaduct at Wilson's Arch toward the north, the protectors made access to the Temple stage considerably more troublesome for attacking powers. 

South of the Temple Mount, excavators have revealed an engraved Roman achievement bearing the names of Vespasian and Titus, designed from one of the staircase handrails which remained over the curve. This places the demolition of the curve at no later than 79 CE. 

Four stone courses of the eastern spring of the curve, comprising of a line of impost squares and three layers of voussoirs, have made due to current occasions. This remainder was first distinguished in 1838 by Biblical researcher Edward Robinson and now bears his name. Around then, before any unearthings, stays of the curve were at ground level. The antiquated road level lay far underground, covered by trash from demolition of structures on the Temple Mount and later fill dumped into the Tyropoeon Valley throughout the hundreds of years. Robinson trusted he had distinguished the eastern edge of a scaffold that connected the Temple Compound with the Upper City which lay on the edge toward the west. 

Amid his examinations of 1867–1870, Charles Warren noticed the nearness of an extensive wharf west of the divider and the remaining parts of the curve. Warren finished up this was nevertheless one of numerous backings for an alleged arrangement of curves supporting an extension spreading over the valley. He in this way burrowed a progression of seven shafts toward the west at standard interims, yet found no proof of extra docks. 

Just amid Benjamin Mazar's unearthings somewhere in the range of 1968 and 1977 

Unearthings close to the curve continued somewhere in the range of 1994 and 1996, coordinated by Ronny Reich and Yaacov Billig. These have revealed a great part of the flotsam and jetsam from the breakdown of the curve. The remaining parts incorporate the two stairs from the staircase and stones from its adjusted handrails. A portion of these are as yet noticeable where they were found, at the Jerusalem Archeological Park currently involving the site. 

The area of the curve along the western mass of the Temple Mount, yet at a separation from the Western Wall square, has provoked the Israeli Government to enable the zone to be utilized for option, non-Orthodox administrations. 

In 2003 Israel's Supreme Court refused ladies from perusing the Torah or wearing customary supplication shawls at the square itself, yet educated the Israeli government to set up the site of Robinson's Arch to host such occasions. The site was initiated in August 2004 and has since facilitated benefits by Reform and Conservative gatherings, just as by different developments, for example, Women of the Wall activists. This has brought about the area being alluded to as "HaKotel HaMasorti" ('Masorti Wall' or 'Customary Wall', which means conventional Jewish recognition not as stringent as Orthodoxy—as contradicted to the "Kotel HaMaravi" ('Western Wall'), which is Orthodox). 

The court-requested trade off, be that as it may, keeps on being disagreeable. Change and Women of the Wall activists believe the area to be inadmissible, to some extent because of the assignment of the recreation center as an archeological site and the subsequent confinements on access and adore, and to some degree because of their apparent treatment as "peons" and their rejection from the Western Wall court. Eric Yoffie, leader of the Union for Reform Judaism, has additionally communicated the sentiment that "The divider as it's been comprehended by the Jewish individuals does not mean Robinson's Arch ... It simply doesn't." 

In April 2013 Jewish Agency administrator Nathan Sharansky proposed an answer for settling the contention over female supplication at the Western Wall, requiring the redesign of the site at the foot of Robinson's Arch to make it open to admirers at painfully inconvenient times of the day (and not rely upon archeological site hours) . On 25 August 2013, another 4,480 square foot petition stage was finished at Robinson's Arch, with access at painfully inconvenient times, as guaranteed. The zone is named "Azarat Yisrael" (or in progressively appropriate articulation, "Ezrat Yisrael"). After some discussion in regards to the topic of power over this petition zone, the declaration was made that it would go under the expert of a future government-named "pluralist gathering" that would incorporate non-Orthodox delegates. 

In January 2017, the Israeli High Court decided that if the legislature of Israel couldn't discover "great reason" to preclude ladies perusing from the Torah in supplication administrations at the Western Wall inside 30 days, ladies could do as such; they additionally decided that the Israeli government could never again contend that the Robinson’s Arch territory of the square is "access toward the Western Wall."(whereas the Orthodox contended for forbidding non Orthodox love there because of its making constraints of access the Western Wall).