Constantine Doukas (usurper) 

Constantine Doukas (or Doux) () (passed on 913) was a conspicuous Byzantine general. In 904, he halted the powerful eunuch court official Samonas from deserting to the Arabs. Consequently, Samonas controlled his dad, Andronikos Doukas, into revolting and escaping to the Abbasid court in 906/7. Constantine pursued his dad to Baghdad , yet before long got away and came back to Byzantium, where he was reestablished by Leo VI the Wise to support and endowed with high military workplaces. Upon the passing of the Emperor Alexander, Constantine with the help of a few privileged people fruitlessly endeavored to usurp the position of authority from the youthful Constantine VII, however was executed in a conflict with supporters of the authentic ruler. 

Constantine Doukas was the child of Andronikos Doukas, an unmistakable general under Emperor Leo VI the Wise (ruled 886–912) and the main conspicuous individual from the Doukas family. Constantine initially shows up in the sources in 904, amid the endeavored trip of the Arab-conceived eunuch Samonas, one of the head's most confided in helpers, to Syria. Constantine caught Samonas at the Monastery of the Holy Cross at Siricha, close to the waterway Halys, and escorted him back to Constantinople, where an enquiry into the issue was held before the Senate. Leo, who was as yet appended to his hireling, urged Constantine to keep up that Samonas had in reality been making a journey to the sanctuary of Siricha, and not the Arab boondocks. At the point when the legislators anyway solicited Constantine to check reality from this case by swearing on "God and the sovereign's head", he would not conceal reality. Samonas was rebuffed by house capture, and in spite of the fact that he was exonerated by Leo after just four months and reestablished to his workplaces, he had considered a profound ill will towards the Doukai. 

This resentment went to the fore in 906, when Samonas deceived Andronikos into declining to take an interest in a magnificent endeavor. Apprehensive that he would be rebuffed for his defiance, Andronikos with his family and retainers fled to the fortification of Kabala, close Iconium, and thus over the fringe into outcast in the Abbasid Caliphate. Constantine and his dad wound up in Baghdad, the Abbasid capital. Leo sent a mystery message to the Doukai, offering a full exculpation on the off chance that they returned, yet again through the plots of Samonas, the letter fell under the control of Caliph al-Muktafi (r. 902–908), who had Andronikos limited to house capture and compelled to change over to Islam alongside the individuals who had tailed him. He kicked the bucket there in ca. 910. Constantine anyway figured out how to escape Baghdad, and was energetically invited back by Leo in a function in the honored position room of the Chrysotriklinos. The date of his arrival to Byzantium is misty, yet should be set between ca. 908 and ca. 911. Regardless of his dad's revolt, the Doukai stayed extremely mainstream because of their military victories, and predictions obviously circled that anticipated Constantine's ascent to the royal position. Subsequently, as per Theophanes Continuatus, Leo cautioned the young fellow from attempting to move toward becoming sovereign, yet this is most likely a later interjection in perspective on Constantine Doukas' inevitable destiny. In all actuality, Leo appears to have confided in him, for he gave him blessings and delegated him to senior military positions: at first he was named—apparently in progression to Eustathios Argyros —"strategos" of the Charsianon topic, yet by 913 he had ascended to the post of Domestic of the Schools (president of the military). From the two positions he battled successfully against the Arabs. 

Leo VI kicked the bucket in May 912 and was prevailing by his sibling Alexander (r. 912–913), who reigned for minimal over a year prior to passing on in June 913. Leo's ruler, Zoe Karbonopsina, and his child and main co-sovereign, Constantine VII (r. 913–959), were sidelined amid the rule of Alexander, who additionally reestablished Zoe's old foe, Nicholas Mystikos, as Patriarch of Constantinople. Along these lines, at the passing of Alexander (6 June 913), with Constantine VII not in any case eight years of age, a power battle followed among Zoe and Patriarch Nicholas, who headed the regime board. It was now that Constantine Doukas propelled a defiance going for the royal position. The "Life of Euthymius" hagiography, a source antagonistic to Patriarch Nicholas, reports that the Patriarch was likewise included, in spite of the fact that the other Byzantine sources incorporate this as a far reaching gossip instead of a reality. As indicated by these sources, unconscious that he would be named official (Alexander named him to the regime committee on his deathbed), dreadful of losing his pre-prominent position, and restless about the military danger presented by the Bulgarian Tsar Simeon, which required an increasingly experienced hand in charge of the express, the Patriarch gathered Doukas to accept the honored position. 

Doukas, getting a charge out of wide help among both the privileged people and the masses, acknowledged the request and made a beeline for Constantinople with a couple of confided in companions. Scarcely three days after Alexander's demise, he entered the capital in mystery amid the night through a postern on the ocean dividers, and covered up in the place of his dad in-law, Gregoras Iberitzes, where he was before long joined by high-positioning squires, for example, the "patrikios" Constantine Helladikos. As of now before sunrise on the next morning, Constantine and his supporters, bearing lights, walked to the Hippodrome, joined en route by an extraordinary huge number of individuals. Constantine was appropriately broadcasted ruler before the general population at the Hippodrome, and headed in triumph towards the Chalke Gate of the supreme royal residence. In the wake of intersection the iron door of the Chalke, be that as it may, at the corridor of the Exkoubitoi, he was contradicted by the warriors of the "Hetaireia" watch and outfitted rowers of the magnificent armada, gathered by the "magistros" John Eladas, an individual from the regime chamber. A conflict pursued, in which many were slaughtered, including Constantine's child Gregory, his nephew Michael and his companion Kourtikes. Demoralized, Constantine turned and attempted to escape, yet his steed slipped and fell. Constantine was executed by a bolt; as indicated by the "Life of Euthymius" reviling the Patriarch Nicholas as he kicked the bucket. His head was sliced off and exhibited to Constantine VII. 

The "Life of Basil the Younger" then again reports a marginally extraordinary rendition, as indicated by which the request to Doukas were attempted by the whole rule board, which proposed to Doukas to expect the administration of the state while Constantine VII would be restricted to his stylized obligations. As per this source, the proposition met with refusal from Doukas, and the officials needed to send a second letter with their own "enkolpia" to convince him generally. When he entered Constantinople, be that as it may, the officials had altered their opinions and blockaded the royal residence against him. After his declaration at the Hippodrome, Doukas made plans to assault the castle, yet at long last endeavored to enter through the Chalke, while requesting his supporters not to draw their swords in order to maintain a strategic distance from slaughter. There he was trapped by toxophilite set by the officials, and murdered alongside some of his supporters. 

Various supporters of the usurper—800 as indicated by the "Life of Euthymius", more than 3,000 as per the "Life of Basil the Younger"—were brutally rebuffed; some were blinded and banished, while others—including the individuals who had looked for asylum in the Hagia Sophia—were tonsured and kept to religious communities, while a significant number of the regular people were joined to stakes on the eastern shore of the Bosporus. 

Constantine Doukas' significant other was shorn and ousted to her better half's home in Paphlagonia and his more youthful child Stephen was emasculated. Alongside the passings of Constantine's child and nephew, this implied the eradication of this part of the Doukas family: the connection of the later bearers of the Doukas name with Andronikos and Constantine is vague. 

In spite of his disappointment at catching the position of authority, Constantine Doukas' prominence implied that his memory was saved both among the general population and the nobility of Asia Minor: during the 930s, Basil the Copper Hand expected his character and drove a worker revolt, while among the gentry he was celebrated as a saint. Components of Constantine's life inevitably found their way into the epic sonnet "Digenes Akrites".