Neighbors Know My Name 

"Neighbors Know My Name" is a tune by American R&B vocalist Trey Songz. It was composed by Songz with Patrick Hayes and Troy Taylor, who delivered the tune with John "$K" McGee. It was discharged to cadenced and urban airplay as the fifth and last single from his third studio collection, "Prepared" on February 16, 2010. The melody, depicted as being snare substantial and having a ground-breaking bassline, got commonly positive audits from faultfinders. The tune achieved forty-three on the "Board" Hot 100 and four on the Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs outline, turning into Songz's third back to back top five R&B hit. 

Melanie Bertoldi of "Board" gave the tune a positive survey, expressing, "he uses his vocal range here, incorporating the prodding falsetto with which he delicately educates his accomplice to 'take this pad directly here/If you chomp it, they won't hear.' Bertoldi additionally complimented the tune's generation, remarking, "'Neighbors' utilizes a thumping bassline and trickle drop impact to give the perfect suggestive background to Songz's messy talk." She likewise brought up that the melody was motivated by Songz's "complex forerunner", R. Kelly. Imprint Edward Nero of About.com additionally said the tune was R. Kelly affected, calling the melody among the collection's best material. Nero stated, "Trey boasts about how the general population adjacent most likely know his identity since his lady shouts it amid sex. 'While I be bangin' on your body, they be bangin' on our divider,' he sings. 'While they be dreamin', you be screamin', presently they bangin' on our entryway.'" "Prepared" collection surveys from Allmusic and PopMatters, noticed the track as a champion, with Tyler Lewis of the last expressing the "great" tunes like "Neighbors" and "I Need A Girl" "pound as they should". Ken Capobianco of the "Boston Globe" complimented the melody's braggadocio alongside "I Invented Sex", anyway remarked that the tune was "inadvertently funny". Andrew Rennie of "Now Magazine" said the collection's snare substantial and perky style was obvious on the track and on "LOL". 

On the week finishing March 13, 2010, "Neighbors Know My Name" appeared at eighty-eight on the "Bulletin" Hot 100. Barely a month later, on the week completion May 15, 2010, it crested at forty-three on the outline. In its twenty-seventh week on the diagram, "Neighbors Know My Name" crested at the top spot on the Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs outline, turning into his fourth top ten single from "Prepared" and his third successive top five hit. 

The video was coordinated by Yolande Geralds, likewise executive for the "I Invented Sex and Say Aah recordings. Teairra Mari, D. Woods, and Shanell were accounted for to have appearances, however the scenes were obviously cut. The video debuted on March 1, 2010. On March 3, 2010, the video was "The New Joint of the Day" on BET's "106 and Park". The music video begins off with a private milk shower scene with Trey Songz and model-on-screen character, Jessica White alongside the tune "Undies Droppa", the introduction track on "Prepared", played out of sight. It at that point fans out into "Neighbors Know My Name" playing out of sight with the remainder of the music video occurring in a room with affection scenes of both Songz and White. A few scenes additionally incorporate Trey Songz before a red foundation. 

He played out the melody on "106 and Park" on February 11, 2010 for "Affection Week" with a variety of "State Aah", and "I Invented Sex".