Without a second thought (Doctor Who) 

"Without a second thought" is the ninth scene in the fifth arrangement of British sci-fi TV arrangement "Specialist Who", which was first communicated on 29 May 2010 on BBC One. It was composed by Chris Chibnall and coordinated by Ashley Way. It is the second scene of a two-section story, the principal scene being "The Hungry Earth", which includes the arrival of the reptilian humanoid Silurians. 

Proceeding from the past scene, outsider time traveler the Doctor (Matt Smith) and geologist Nasreen Chaudhry (Meera Syal) have taken the TARDIS far beneath the ground to the Silurian city where the Doctor's friend Amy Pond (Karen Gillan), a neighborhood man named Mo (Alun Raglan), and Mo's child, Elliot (Samuel Davies), are being held prisoner. In the interim, over the ground, Amy's fiancăš, Rory (Arthur Darvill); Mo's better half, Ambrose (Nia Roberts); and Ambrose's dad, Tony (Robert Pugh), keep watch over Alaya (Neve McIntosh), a caught Silurian who is the way to liberating the prisoners. While the Doctor leaves Amy and Nasreen to arrange offering the planet to the Silurians, to enable Mo to discover his child Eliot, it is uncovered that Restac's sister Alaya has been executed by Ambrose superficially. 

Chibnall was chosen by official makers Steven Moffat and Piers Wenger to compose a two-section scene about the arrival of the Silurians. Chibnall needed "Without hesitation" specifically to be about the errors individuals make under strain, and struggle that could leave ensuring a family. The scene is additionally associated with the arrangement's story circular segment, as the break known to mankind returns toward the finish of the scene. "The Hungry Earth" and "Intentionally and without hesitation" were recorded in October and November 2009, with scenes "Cold Blood" shot in Llanwynno, Wales, Cardiff's Temple of Peace, Plantasia, and a variety of areas and sets for parts of the Silurian city, which the creation group did not have any desire to resemble a cavern. The scene was viewed by 7.49 million watchers in the United Kingdom and got blended audits from commentators. A few analysts were disillusioned by the plot and attributes of the Silurians, however the enthusiastic completion was generally commended. 

Profound under the Earth, Amy and Mo escape from Silurian specialist Malohkeh's experimentation and Mo finds his child, Elliot, calmed in a chamber and under perception. The pioneer of the Silurian warrior station, Restac, demands both the Doctor and geologist Nasreen Chaudhry be executed and escorts them to a Silurian court; however Amy and Mo intrude on the preliminary with stolen weapons, they also are caught. Eldane, Restac's unrivaled, is brought in by Malohkeh and requests a stop to the threats. 

The Doctor reaches Rory; Mo's significant other, Ambrose; and Ambrose's dad, Tony, reminding them to keep their hostage Silurian, Restac's sister Alaya, alive. They are uninformed that Ambrose has just slaughtered Alaya on the grounds that she would not help Tony, whom she had tainted with Silurian venom. The Doctor organizes a gathering between Eldane, Amy, and Nasreen; the three talk about how people and Silurians can coincide superficially. Ambrose and Tony, stressed over the Silurian response when they find Alaya's demise, set Nasreen and Tony's drill to tunnel into the oxygen pockets of the Silurians' underground city fifteen minutes after they withdraw, which would obliterate it. 

In the interim, Restac has slaughtered Malohkeh for his treachery and stirred different individuals from the warrior standing, planning to arrange an upset against Eldane. The Doctor escapes with the people and channels a vitality heartbeat to the base of the drill before it impacts the city. Eldane restores the warriors to hibernation by starting a "dangerous fumigation"; the people departure, and Eldane trusts that in a thousand years, harmony among people and Silurians can happen. Tony, still influenced by Silurian venom, selects to remain behind to be restored, and Nasreen remains with Tony. 

The Doctor, Amy and Rory locate a split in the natural hollow divider like those they have seen previously. The Doctor derives that the break was brought about by a blast in time, which may have deserted shrapnel. He comes to in and hauls out an article which he envelops by a tissue. Restac, kicking the bucket from the dangerous introduction, slithers around the bend and shoot at the Doctor, yet Rory drives him off the beaten path and takes the shot, biting the dust in Amy's arms. The break assimilates Rory's body, causing Amy to lose her memory of Rory. Coming back to the surface, the Doctor takes out the article he pulled from the break: a consumed bit of the TARDIS's sign. 

Essayist Chris Chibnall was shrunk by official makers Steven Moffat and Piers Wenger to compose a two-section "Specialist Who" scene about Silurians and a drill. Chibnall had recently composed the "Specialist Who" scene "42" just as scenes of the turn off arrangement "Torchwood". "Intentionally and without hesitation" is the second piece of the story which started with "The Hungry Earth"; the last developed the pressure while "With a savage cruelty" was intended to get into the activity. "With a savage cruelty" is likewise set in the greater setting of the Silurian city, while "The Hungry Earth" was set in a little Welsh town. Chibnall needed the Silurian city to diverge from the town. Chibnall needed it to be a "tale about individuals committing errors under monstrous weight" and the incidental clash that left securing a family; thusly, he constantly expected for Alaya to bite the dust. He considered "Without a second thought" particularly to be "so unmistakably about the Silurians and what the Silurians need". 

Moffat's arrangement "from the beginning", to integrate the scene with the overall story bend of the arrangement, was that Rory bite the dust as well as be eradicated from history in the split known to man. Moffat would later bring Rory back in "The Pandorica Opens", however the scene uncovers his cognizance was put in a Roman centurion Auton as a feature of a snare for the Doctor to spare the universe from the breaks. Moffat likewise thought it was proper as the trio had a ton of fun, and now it was the ideal opportunity for a loss. Rory's demise is likewise associated with Chibnall's topic of committing errors; it was the Doctor's issue as he halted to take a gander at the break. Gillan called the scene "amazingly testing" for her to perform and attempted to make it "honest and credible". 

"The Hungry Earth" and "Intentionally and without hesitation" made up the fourth generation square of the arrangement and were recorded in late October and November 2009 in the Upper Boat Studios and Llanwynno, Wales. "With a savage cruelty" used a wide range of areas and unordinary sets to depict the Silurian city, as the generation group did not need basically a "cavern feel". They trusted that the Silurians were additionally refined and had the capacity to utilize materials discovered underground, for example, rock and marble. A considerable lot of the sets were given an orange sparkle from underneath to depict the "surrounding gleam" from the focal point of the earth. The wilderness walkway prompting the Silurian city was recorded in the Plantasia professional flowerbed in Swansea on 13 November 2009. The set gave a feeling of things developing, as these were essential for the Silurians to endure. Set planners had the capacity to adjust the plants, however they must be mindful so as not to demonstrate the window prompting the vehicle leave or other current luxuries. The corridor where the Doctor is brought for execution was recorded at the Temple of Peace in Cardiff, and small dressing was done to the set. 

"Without remorse" was first communicated in the United Kingdom on BBC One and simulcast on BBC HD on 29 May 2010. Beginning medium-term appraisals demonstrated that the scene was viewed by 5.7 million watchers, a million more than the earlier week. Last solidified evaluations rose to 7.49 million (7.04 million on BBC One and 0.45 million on BBC HD), positioning the show fourth for the week finishing 30 May 2010 on the channel and the most astounding appraised appear on BBC One through the afternoon. The scene got an Appreciation Index of 85, considered "incredible". 

"Without a second thought" was discharged in Region 2 on DVD and Blu-beam on 2 August 2010 with the scenes "Amy's Choice" and "The Hungry Earth". It was then re-discharged as a feature of the Complete Fifth Series boxset on 8 November 2010. 

The scene got blended surveys from commentators. Dan Martin, composing for "The Guardian", said that the scene was like past Silurian stories in "Specialist Who", however he said he cherished the "strained, frantic and astute story". He communicated "amuse" at Amy and Nasreen consulting for the people, however he thought the tact scenes were "comprehensively drawn". By and large, he considered the quality of the scene was "giving you something significant and good to bite over, such that nothing else this arrangement has yet". Gavin Fuller of "The Daily Telegraph" likewise thought about "With a savage cruelty's" idea and thoughts to the first 1970 Silurians story however considered this story made "less of an effect" due to a "highly contrasting portrayal" and the one-dimensional Restac. He was likewise reproachful of Matt Smith's Doctor, whose depiction "needed gravitas and conviction and was through and through too cheerful". Be that as it may, he commended both Smith and Gillan's "solid" exhibitions in the last scene where Rory is murdered. 

"The A.V. Club's" Keith Phipps gave the scene a B+, taking note of that Rory's demise had been ruined for him by analysts on the site and in this way he didn't appreciate the scene as much as he may have. He called it "fulfilling, if not remarkable" end and "another truly strong passage in the arrangement". He further commending Gillan and Amy's character for "[continuing] to awe" just as the profundities to the supporting characters by both Chibnall and Way, and the moral stories that could be gotten from the contention between the people and the Silurians and the fallout of Rory's end. 

IGN's Matt Wales appraised the scene 8 out of 10, and imagined that "even less really occurred" than the past scene, however he appreciated the "air develop and progressively astute tone". While he thought of it as unsurprising, he said that "regardless it offered bounty in the method for amusement with its lively pace, delightfully acknowledged underground world and a persuading cast regarding adjusted characters". He lauded Smith and Gillan's exhibitions in the consummation, yet thought it was "a shockingly downbeat end result". Ian Berriman of "SFX magazine" gave "Without hesitation" four and a half out of five stars, decidedly contrasting the enthusiastic consummation with scenes from the Russell T Davies period. He likewise had some "nitpicks" about the scene, for example, the sudden character change of Malohkeh.