Leo Martello 

Leo Martello (September 26, 1930 – June 29, 2000) was an American Wiccan cleric, gay rights dissident, and creator. He was an establishing individual from the Strega Tradition, a type of the cutting edge Pagan new religious development of Wicca which drew upon his own Italian legacy. Amid his lifetime he distributed various books on such obscure subjects as Wicca, crystal gazing, and tarot perusing. 

Destined to a common laborers Italian American family in Dudley, Massachusetts, he was raised Roman Catholic despite the fact that ended up keen on elusiveness as a young person. He later guaranteed that when he was 21, relatives started him into a convention of black magic acquired from their Sicilian precursors; this contentions with different explanations that he made, and there is no autonomous proof to support his case. Amid the 1950s, he was situated in New York City, where he filled in as a graphologist and trance specialist. In the wake of starting to distribute books on paranormal points in the mid 1960s, he openly started distinguishing as Wiccan in 1969, and expressed that he was associated with a New York coven. 

After the Stonewall mobs of 1969, Martello – himself a gay man – included himself in gay rights activism, turning into an individual from the Gay Liberation Front (GLF). Leaving the GLF following an inside split, he turned into an establishing individual from the Gay Activist Alliance (GAA) and composed a standard section, "The Gay Witch", for its paper. In 1970 he established the Witches International Craft Associates (WICA) as a systems administration association for Wiccans, and under its sponsorship sorted out a "Witch In" that occurred in Central Park at Halloween 1970, regardless of restriction from the New York City Parks Department. To crusade for the social liberties of Wiccans, he established the Witches Anti-Defamation League, which was later renamed the Alternative Religions Education Network. In 1973, he visited England, there being started into Gardnerian Wicca by the Gardnerian High Priestess Patricia Crowther. He kept rehearsing Wicca into the 1990s, when he withdrew from open life, in the long run capitulating to disease in 2000. 

Martello was conceived on September 26, 1930, in Dudley, Massachusetts, being raised on a little homestead leased by his dad, the Italian outsider Rocco Luigi Martello. Following the monetary disturbance of the Great Depression, the Martellos were constrained from their property and moved first to Worcester, Massachusetts and after that to Southbridge, Massachusetts. It was here that Leo was immersed into the Roman Catholic Church, yet his folks separated before long. Unfit to think about only him, his dad sent Martello to the Catholic boarding private academy appended to Assumption College, Worcester, which was controlled by the Augustinians of the Assumption. He went through six years at the school, later portraying it as the unhappiest time of his life. He examined graphology and from the age of 16 started showing up as a graphologist, additionally composing stories for magazines. 

Martello later professed to have encountered clairvoyant wonders as a kid, starting his enthusiasm for otherworldliness. By his initial young years, he had started examining palmistry and tarot card perusing with a Gypsy named Marta. He likewise later guaranteed that his dad had educated him that his grandma, Maria Concetta, had been a clairvoyant known as a "Strega Maga" ("Great Witch") in the place where she grew up of Enna, Sicily, Italy. As per Martello's record, Concetta had functioned as a people mystical performer and tarot card peruser, and pulled in the scorn and jealousy of the neighborhood Catholic pastorate. He additionally related that on one event, she had murdered a Mafioso utilizing enchantment when he compromised her better half for not paying insurance cash. Martello related that when he was 16, his dad disclosed to him that he had cousins in New York City who wished to meet him. He continued to do as such and – as per his record – they educated him that they were starts of an old Italian black magic religion, "La Vecchia" ("the Old Religion"). In the wake of distinguishing his ownership of mystic forces, they started him into the convention on his 21st birthday in 1951, influencing him to make a solemn vow never to uncover the mysteries of the "La Vecchia". Moving to the city, he learned at Hunter College and the Institute for Psychotherapy. 

Martello never created any confirmation to help his cases, and there is no free proof that validate them. An unknown lady who had known Martello educated the scientist Michael G. Lloyd that amid the 1980s, he had revealed to her that he had never been started into a convention of Witchcraft, and that he had essentially grasped otherworldliness during the 1960s so as to acquire a living. The Pagan investigations researcher Ethan Doyle White communicated analysis of Martello's cases, taking note of that it was "incredibly dubious" that a convention of Wicca could have been gone down through Martello's Sicilian family. Rather, he recommended that Martello may have been told in a custom of people enchantment that he later decorated into a type of Wicca, that the cousins themselves had developed a type of Wicca that they passed on to Martello, or that the whole situation had been a creation of Martello's. 

Situated in New York City, in 1950 Martello established the American Hypnotism Academy, proceeding to coordinate the association until 1954. From 1955 to 1957, he filled in as treasurer of the American Graphological Society, and functioned as an independent graphologist for such corporate customers as the Unifonic Corporation of America and the Associated Special Investigators International. He additionally distributed a section titled "Your Handwriting Tells" for a long time that kept running in the "Chelsea Clinton News", and provided different articles regarding the matter of graphology to various magazines. In the city, he likewise started to visit the gay scene. In 1955, Martello was granted a Doctorate in Divinity by a non-certify association, the National Congress of Spiritual Consultants, a clearing house for enrolled yet unaffiliated clergymen. That year, he established the Temple of Spiritual Guidance, assuming the job of Pastor, which he would proceed in until 1960, when he started to concentrate on his composition and his new logic of "psychoselfism". In 1961 he distributed his first book, "Your Pen Personality", in which he examined the way in which penmanship could be utilized to uncover the identity of the essayist. Martello related with California-based Pagan Victor Henry Anderson, and it was at Martello's support that Anderson set up his Mahaelani Coven around 1960. 

Martello guaranteed that in the late spring of 1964, he moved to Tangier, Morocco, where he examined the historical backdrop of the tarot, bringing about the production of "It's likely" (1964). Coming back to the U.S. in 1965, he moved into a condo in Greenwich Village, New York City, composing a book on soothsaying, "It's Written in the Stars", and a book on mystic assurance, "How to Prevent Psychic Blackmail". He additionally started going to the Spiritualist social affairs that were worked by Clifford Bias at the Ansonia Hotel. Sooner or later High Priestess Lori Bruno established a black magic coven and church, Our Lord and Lady of the Trinacrian Rose, in which Leo was recognized as Elder. In 1969 he openly uncovered himself to be an expert of Witchcraft; guaranteeing that he had picked up the consent of his coven to do as such. Plan on countering the negative attention that Wicca had been getting, he distributed "The Weird Ways of Witchcraft" in 1969, that year that he likewise distributed "The Hidden World of Hypnotism". 

In July 1969, Martello went to an open gathering of the Mattachine Society's New York branch. He was shocked at the Society's pessimistic response to the Stonewall revolts, and blasted those gay individuals in the gathering of people who acknowledged the classification of homosexuality as a psychological maladjustment, blaming them for acting naturally abhorring. He continued to distribute his musings in a paper in which he expressed that "homosexuality isn't an issue in itself. The issue is society's frame of mind towards it." Those gay rights activists who dismissed the Mattachine Society's methodology and who supported an angry position against the police and specialists established the Gay Liberation Front (GLF), with Martello chose the gathering's first arbitrator. Martello bolstered the GLF's position that censured "this spoiled, messy, detestable, messed up industrialist intrigue" that commanded American culture, and he volunteered by creating articles both for the gathering's pamphlet "Turn Out!" and for the more extensive press. He was associated with the GLF's battle against "The Village Voice's" choice to boycott "gay" from promotions; the magazine favored the expression "homophile", which had likewise been utilized by the Mattachine Society. Needing to part from past gay freedom associations, the GLF grasped the expression "gay", with Martello rejecting "homophile" as seeming like a nail document for gay people. 

The GLF was organized around an arrangement of anarchic agreement, which made it troublesome for the gathering to achieve ends on any issue, and warmed contentions wound up ordinary at its gatherings. In November 1969, the gathering's participation casted a ballot to give political and money related help to the Black Panthers, a furnished African-American liberal gathering. This was vigorously disputable among the GLF, given the homophobic idea of the Black Panthers, and brought about a leave numerous senior individuals, including Martello, Arthur Evans, Arthur Bell, Lige Clarke, and Jack Nichols. That month, Martello was welcome to a private gathering of these alienated GLF individuals which brought about the arrangement of the Gay Activist Alliance (GAA). Albeit proceeding with the GLF's accentuation on adopting a fierce strategy to ordinary American culture and specialist, the gathering was all the more firmly sorted out and organized, and concentrated solely on achieving equivalent rights for gay and lesbian individuals. The representative Al Goldstein consented to put $25,000 in the GAA's new pursuit, a paper composed by, and went for, the nation's gay network. It was propelled in December 1969 as "GAY", and it before long picked up a readership of 25,000. Martello contributed a standard segment known as "The Gay Witch", contacting his largest crowd to date, likewise writing an assortment of different articles that showed up in it. 

In 1970, Martello established the Witches International Craft Associates (WICA), through which he issued "The WICA Newsletter", set up to clarify what Witchcraft and Wicca was to the more extensive open and to fill in as an asset through which soothsayers could reach each other. In April 1970 he showed up on the WNEW-TV Channel 5 narrative arrangement "Helluva Town", performing Witchcraft customs with a few partners in Central Park. That year saw one of New York's first significant social affairs of mediums, the Festival of Occult Arts, just as the main Earth Day festivity and the primary Christopher Street Gay Liberation Day march. These occasions motivated Martello's craving to hold an open Witchcraft Sabbat festivity. Acting under the protection of WICA, in pre-fall he moved toward the New York City Parks Department requesting consent to hold a "Witch-In" in Sheep Meadow, at the south end of Central Park, on October 31, 1970. The Department won't, and when Martello expressed that the Witchcraft people group would accumulate there notwithstanding in their ability as private people, he was undermined with police activity. Martello picked up the lawful help of the New York Civil Liberties Union (NYCLU), who educated the Parks Department that they were in break of the First Amendment. The Department in this way turned around their choice, and the occasion proceeded. 

Enlivened by his triumph over the Parks Department, Martello established an association dedicated to battling for the religious privileges of Witches, the Witches Anti-Defamation League (WADL), which would inevitably be renamed the Alternative Religions Education Network (AREN). For WADL, he wrote an exposition titled "The Witch Manifesto", likely impacted via Carl Wittman's "Evacuees from Amerika: A Gay Manifesto" (1970), which requested that the Roman Catholic Church face a court for wrongdoings submitted against blamed witches in the Early Modern time frame and that they pay reparations to the cutting edge Witchcraft people group for those activities. Amid this decade he composed a section for "Gnostica" magazine which was titled "Wicca Basket", a quip on the phonetic likeness among "Wicca" and "wicker". 

In 1971, a youthful gay Wiccan named Eddie Buczynski reached Martello, and mentioned inception. Because of Buczynski's freshness in the religion, Martello turned him down, albeit built up a kinship with him. Martello acquainted Buczynski both with different covens who may start him, and to Herman Slater, who might turn into his long-lasting accomplice. Slater was sick with different therapeutic inconveniences, and on one event was restoring at the New York University Medical Center when Martello played out a recuperating custom on him with the help of Buczynski. Martello would come to be known as a normal at The Warlock Shop, a mysterious store opened by Slater in New York. Through "The WICA Newsletter", Martello had met Lady Gwen Thompson, the originator of the New England Covens of Traditionalist Witches (NECTW), and chose to acquaint Buczynski with her, subsequent in Buczynski's introduction into the convention in Spring 1972. Martello and Thompson later dropped out, with some unverified records asserting that it was on the grounds that he loaned her cash and she didn't pay him back. In October 1972, Buczynski established his very own custom of Wicca, named Welsh Traditionalist Witchcraft, with Martello turning into an early start and assuming the name of "Foe" inside that convention. Thus, Martello invited Buczynski into his "La Vecchia" convention, and started him through its three degree framework. 

In November 1972, Martello addressed at the principal Friends of the Craft meeting, held at New York's First Unitarian Church. In April 1973, he moved to England for a half year, where he was started and prepared in the three degrees of Gardnerian Wicca by the Sheffield coven kept running by Patricia Crowther and her significant other Arnold Crowther. He kept on empowering acknowledgment of homosexuality inside the Pagan and Witchcraft people group, writing an article titled "The Gay Pagan" for "Green Egg" magazine. He communicated the view that homophobic Wiccans were "explicitly shaky" and that they saw the religion basically as "a ceremonial methods for sex". 

He was likewise among the unmistakable male Pagans to underwrite women's activist and female-just variations of Wicca, for example, the Dianic Wicca advanced by Zsuzsanna Budapest. 

Amid the 1990s, Martello resigned from his open work. Doyle White noticed that while Martello blurred from unmistakable quality as the leader of the Strega Wicca development, the convention picked up "another open backer" in Raven Grimassi. Martello kicked the bucket of disease on 29 June 2000. Bruno was the executrix of his home. 

Lloyd depicted Martello as "a lean, hungry scrapper with piercing eyes, the substance of a dull holy messenger, and a mouth like a bear trap", while in her reference book on Wicca, Rosemary Ellen Guiley portrayed him as "a beautiful figure, known for his silliness". Bruno depicted him as "a cherishing man, yet now and then scathing", expressing that to know him "was a respect, and ever a test". He was frequently noted for his scruffy appearance, with him regularly wearing second-hand garments. 

Martello protected the developing ascent of women's activists in Wicca amid the 1970s, reprimanding what he regarded to be the nonstop restraint of ladies inside the Pagan development. He additionally upheld the view that any Pagan who was engaged with the U.S. government or military was a wolf in sheep's clothing. He was condemning of Wiccans who embraced a division between white enchantment and dark enchantment, remarking that it had racial hints and that a significant number of those pushing such a view were bigot. 

Albeit mindful that students of history had censured the witch-religion speculation of Margaret Murray, Martello remained by her cases, trusting that the clique had been gone through oral convention and along these lines dodged showing up in the literary sources considered by antiquarians. 

Martello thought it immaterial that numerous Wiccans had lied about the causes of their convictions, being cited by Pagan columnist Margot Adler in her book "Drawing Down the Moon" as having expressed Let's expect that numerous individuals lied about their genealogy. How about we further accept that there are no covens on the present scene that have any chronicled premise. The reality remains: they do exist "now". Furthermore, they can guarantee an "otherworldly" heredity returning a great many years. The majority of our pre-Judeo-Christian or Moslem precursors were "Agnostics"!