Lockheed AH-56 Cheyenne 

The Lockheed AH-56 Cheyenne was an assault helicopter created by Lockheed for the United States Army. It ascended from the Army's Advanced Aerial Fire Support System (AAFSS) program to handle the administration's previously devoted assault helicopter. Lockheed planned the Cheyenne utilizing a four-sharp edge unbending rotor framework and arranged the flying machine as a compound helicopter with low-mounted wings and a tail-mounted pushing propeller driven by a General Electric T64 turboshaft motor. The Cheyenne was to have a rapid dash capacity to give outfitted escort to the Army's vehicle helicopters, for example, the Bell UH-1 Iroquois. 

In 1966, the Army granted Lockheed an agreement for ten AH-56 models, yet as a stopgap likewise requested the less unpredictable AH-1G Cobra as a between time assault flying machine for battle in Vietnam. The AH-56's lady flight occurred on 21 September 1967. In January 1968, the Army granted Lockheed a generation contract, in light of flight testing progress. A lethal accident and specialized issues influencing execution put Cheyenne advancement behind calendar, bringing about the dropping of the creation contract on 19 May 1969. Advancement of the Cheyenne proceeded with the expectation that the helicopter would in the long run enter administration. 

Be that as it may, as American inclusion in Vietnam was slowing down, the Army dropped the Cheyenne program on 9 August 1972. At this point, the AH-1 Cobra was broadly conveyed by the Army amid the Vietnam War and furnished with the TOW hostile to tank rocket. Contention with the United States Air Force over the Cheyenne's job in battle just as the political atmosphere in regards to military securing programs had made the Army alter the administration's assault helicopter prerequisites for a twin-motor ordinary helicopter, saw as not so much specialized but rather more survivable. The Army declared another program for an Advanced Attack Helicopter (AAH) on 17 August 1972, which prompted the improvement of the AH-64 Apache. 

Preceding the advancement of the AH-56, every single outfitted helicopter had been alterations to existing flying machine intended for unarmed employments. In 1962, at that point U.S. Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara assembled the Howze Board to audit Army aeronautics prerequisites. The board prescribed an airmobile division upheld by 90 furnished helicopters. The suggestion of the Howze Board came in the meantime the Army was planning to send its originally equipped escort helicopters to Vietnam; 15 UH-1A Iroquois were adjusted with frameworks for mounting automatic weapons, explosive launchers, and rocket cases. 

In June 1962, Bell Helicopter introduced another helicopter plan to Army authorities, with expectations of requesting subsidizing for further improvement. The D-255 Iroquois Warrior was imagined as a reason constructed assault flying machine dependent on the UH-1B airframe and dynamic parts, with a nose-mounted ball turret, a stomach mounted firearm unit, and stub wings for mounting rockets or SS.10 hostile to tank rockets. 

In December 1962, Combat Development Command (CDC) drafted a Qualitative Material Requirement (QMR) for a between time, business off-the-rack (COTS) air ship, with a 140-hitch (161â mph, 259â km/h) voyage speed and a 1,500-pound (680â kg) payload. This was viewed as an endeavor by Army authorities, foreseeing the capability of the D-255, to procure an interval flying machine to fill the escort job until the Army could decide the prerequisites for a committed furnished helicopter. In any case, the Secretary of the Army objected the between time approach and coordinated that the Army search for a further developed framework that would drastically improve over momentum helicopter plans. 

In view of the direction from the Secretary of the Army, CDC built up Qualitative Material Development Objectives (QMDO) for a rotational wing flying machine with 195-hitch (224â mph, 361â km/h) voyage speed, 220-tie (253â mph, 407â km/h) dash speed, and the ability to float out-of-ground-impact (OGE) at 6,000â feet (1,830â m) on a 95Â Â°F (35Â Â°C) day. The speed necessities were gotten from the speed of airplane the helicopter would escort. The Director of Defense Research and Engineering (DDRE) restrictively endorsed the progressions to the improvement goals, pending his audit of the proposed program. He likewise guided the Army to decide if some other helicopter could offer an improvement in act over the UH-1B meanwhile. 

Thus, the Army Material Command (AMC) directed an examination to decide whether the advancement goals were possible and furthermore settled a program office for the Fire-bolster Aerial System (FAS). AMC prescribed to limit the challenge to compound helicopters, as they were viewed as the main helicopter design at the time equipped for being created to meet the goals. In March 1964, the Secretary of the Army instructed DDRE that change with respect to existing air ship would not approach the required execution of the FAS program; the Army would keep utilizing the equipped UH-1B until improvement of the FAS could continue. 

On 26 March 1964, the Army Chief of Staff redesignated the FAS program as the Advanced Aerial Fire Support System (AAFSS). The improvement destinations report (QMDO) for the AAFSS was affirmed in April 1964, and on 1 August 1964, the Transportation Research and Engineering Command reached 148 imminent contractual workers with a solicitation for recommendations (RFP). Chime presented the D-262, an adjustment of the D-255, yet at the same time a traditional helicopter plan. Sikorsky presented the S-66, which highlighted a "Rotorprop" that would fill in as a tail rotor yet as velocities expanded would pivot 90â° to go about as pusher propeller. Lockheed presented the CL-840 structure, an inflexible rotor compound helicopter with both a pushing propeller and an ordinary tail rotor mounted toward the finish of the tail. 

The Army reported Lockheed and Sikorsky as victors of Project Definition Phase contracts on 19 February 1965. In the mean time, the Army likewise kept on pursueing a break flying machine for battle in Vietnam until the AAFSS could be handled, bringing about advancement of the Bell AH-1 Cobra which would turn into the foundation of the Army's assault helicopter armada amid and after the Vietnam War. 

Lockheed and Sikorsky created recommendations for their individual structures, building up three designs to fulfill both the improvement goals and a reexamined RFP dependent on a draft prerequisites record. An assessment board examined each organization's proposition and after that presented its suggestion to a determination specialist gathering on 6 October 1965. On 3 November 1965, the Army declared Lockheed as the victor of the AAFSS program. The Army saw Lockheed's structure as more affordable, ready to be conveyed sooner, and a lower specialized hazard than Sikorsky's Rotorprop. On 17 December 1965, the Army discharged the last prerequisites record. The report included fourteen prerequisites that were not recently tended to by Lockheed's proposition, including the expansion of a flying rocket combat hardware subsystem. 

On 23 March 1966, the Army granted Lockheed a building and improvement contract for 10 models, assigning the air ship AH-56A. Beginning working ability was made arrangements for 1972 with a hopeful focus generally 1970. Lockheed started development of the airplane at its Van Nuys, California office, and on 3 May 1967, Lockheed held a take off function for the AH-56A. The flying machine was initiated "Cheyenne" by the Army. The main trip of the AH-56 happened on 21 September 1967. The Secretary of Defense affirmed pre-creation subsidizing to help an underlying generation request for 375 airplane on 8 January 1968. Assembling of the 10 Cheyenne models was finished by 1969. 

Lockheed planned the Cheyenne as a compound helicopter, which joins a helicopter with fixed-wing highlights for expanded execution, typically speed. The structure included highlights, for example, an inflexible fundamental rotor, low-mounted wings, and a pusher propeller. The Cheyenne was controlled by a General Electric T64 turboshaft motor. Push was given by a pusher propeller at the back of the flying machine. At high speeds, the measure of lift given by the wings, alongside push from the pusher prop, diminished the streamlined stacking of the rotor. At such speeds, the rotor delivered 20% of the lift and could be balanced by aggregate pitch control changes. Rotor tilt was controlled through gyroscopic precession. The Cheyenne accomplished speeds over 200â knots (230â mph, 370â km/h), yet as a compound helicopter was unfit to fit the bill for speed records in helicopter classifications. 

The Cheyenne had a two-situate couple cockpit highlighting a propelled route and flame control suite. The pair seating set the pilot in the back seat, and the heavy armament specialist in the front seat. An uncommon component of the heavy weapons specialist's station was that the whole seat, locating framework, and discharging controls pivoted to keep the heavy armament specialist confronting a similar course as the firearm turret being controlled. The firearm locate managed the heavy armament specialist direct review from the turret by method for a periscope locate. The pilot had a protective cap mounted sight framework for pointing weapons. 

Weapon turrets were mounted at the nose and the center of air ship underbelly. The nose turret could pivot +/ - 100â° from the air ship's centerline and could mount either a 40â mm (1.57â in) projectile launcher, or a 7.62â mm (0.308â in) minigun. The stomach turret incorporated a 30â mm (1.18â in) programmed gun with 360â° of pivot. Mechanical stops kept the tummy turret from going for any piece of the helicopter. 

Six outer hardpoints were situated along the base of the helicopter, with two under each wing and two on the fuselage under the sponsons. The two inward wing hardpoints could convey cases of three BGM-71 TOW enemy of tank rockets. 2.75-inch (70â mm) rockets in 7-rocket or 19-rocket launchers could be carried on the four wing hardpoints. The two fuselage mounts were committed to conveying outside fuel tanks. The wing hardpoints were likewise plumbed to permit the carriage of extra fuel tanks whenever required. 

Flight testing started with the main trip of the second AH-56 (s/n 66-8827) in September 1967. Amid early flight tests, a rotor insecurity issue was found when the air ship was flying at low elevation in ground impact. As the flight envelope was extended, this precariousness and other minor issues were found and immediately tended to. 

Lockheed and the Army held a 13-minute exhibition "first flight" for people in general at the Van Nuys Airport on 12 December 1967. Amid the flight, the Cheyenne showed a portion of the new capacities achieved by the pushing propeller; the helicopter could back off or quicken without pitching the nose up or down, just as having the capacity to pitch the nose down or up at a float, without making the airplane quicken advances or in reverse. The Cheyenne exhibited a stationary float in a 30-tie (35â mph, 56â km/h) crosswind, and toward the finish of the flight arrived on its two forward landing gear, "bowed" to the group of onlookers and after that delicately set the tail arrival gear down as it navigated to stopping. By March 1968, the AH-56 had set up a flight envelope of 170â knots (196 Â mph, 315â km/h) in forward flight, 25â knots (29â mph, 46â km/h) sidewards, and 20â knots (23â mph, 37â km/h) rearwards. 

The venture endured a difficulty on 12 March 1969, when the rotor on model #3 (s/n 66-8828) struck the fuselage and made the air ship crash, executing the pilot, David A. Beil. The mishap happened on a dry run where the pilot was to control the controls to energize 0.5P motions (or half-P jump) in the rotor; 0.5P is a vibration that happens once per two fundamental rotor transformations, where P is the rotor's rotational speed. The mishap examination noticed that wellbeing systems on the controls had clearly been handicapped for the flight. The examination inferred that the pilot-incited motions had set up a resounding vibration that surpassed the rotor framework's capacity to redress. After the examination, the rotor and control frameworks were adjusted to keep a similar issue from happening once more. 

The Army issued a fix notice to Lockheed on 10 April 1969, refering to 11 specialized issues, and inadmissible advancement on the program. The fundamental issues were the half-P jump vibration issue, and the airplane net weight surpassing system necessities. Accordingly, Lockheed proposed an "improved flight control framework" (ICS) to lessen rotor motions, and ventures for expelling overabundance weight and tending to other minor issues underway helicopters. The Army felt Lockheed's answers for the fix see issues would postpone the program and increment costs. Refering to Lockheed's powerlessness to meet the creation course of events, the Army dropped the AH-56 generation contract on 19 May 1969, yet held the advancement contract with the expectation that the issues could be settled. 

In September 1969, Cheyenne model #10 (s/n 66-8835) experienced breeze burrow testing at NASA Ames Research Center, to inquire about the half-P jump and drag issues. The specialists did not understand that the fixed mounts used to verify the flying machine in the breeze passage would not enable the helicopter to move with respect to the rotor, as it did in flight. Therefore, there was no characteristic damping of the rotor pitching movement. The remote controllers' absence of tangible input from helicopter intensified the circumstance. Amid fast testing to duplicate the half-P bounce vibration, the rotor motions immediately quickened wild and struck the tail blast, bringing about the ruinous separation of the helicopter. 

Lockheed dealt with adjusting the AH-56 configuration to address the vibration and different issues. As a safety measure, Cheyenne #9 (s/n 66-8834) was fitted with a discharge situate for the pilot after the March mishap. The descending shooting discharge situate was set in the forward seat instead of the heavy armament specialist's station. This model would be utilized for all residual envelope extension flights. Model #9 additionally got an updated transmission and drivetrain, and a pivoted back overhang instead of the first sliding shelter around 1970. The new transmission permitted the T64-GE-16 turboshaft motor yield to be expanded from a derated 3,435â horsepower (2,561Â kW) to 3,925â horsepower (2,927Â kW). The new overhang disposed of the shelter vibrations. 

Cheyenne model #6 (s/n 66-8831) started directing weapons testing at Yuma Proving Ground, Arizona, showing the capacity for the heavy armament specialist and pilot to precisely discharge on independent focuses on each side on the helicopter. Towards the finish of 1970, the Army financed chip away at TOW rocket direction and night locating frameworks. Models #6 and #9 were likewise tried and assessed at Yuma Proving Ground from 30 January to 23 December 1971, to decide whether strength and control frameworks were adequate. Lacks were recognized in parallel directional strength, uncommanded movement amid moving, high vibration, and poor directional control amid sidewards flying. 

Following the testing at Yuma, model #9 got the improved T64-GE-716 motor creating 4,275â shp (3,188Â kW) and the arranged generation adaptation of the ICS framework. With these redesigns, the helicopter outperformed its execution prerequisites. In any case, under specific conditions soundness and control did not totally fulfill the aircraft testers. Lockheed had considered approaches to keep temperamental input from the gyro. The arrangement was to migrate the gyro from the highest point of the rotor head to underneath the transmission with adaptable associations with the rotor. The pilot's controls were associated with water powered servomotors then associated through springs to the gyro. This framework averted rotor vibration powers from transmitting again into the flight controls. It was known as the "progressed mechanical control framework" (AMCS) and was introduced on Cheyenne #7 in 1972 to improve dealing with and rotor solidness. 

In 1971, political contact expanded between the Army and the Air Force over the nearby air support (CAS) mission. The Air Force declared that the Cheyenne would encroach broadcasting live Force's CAS mission in help of the Army, which had been ordered with the Key West Agreement of 1948. The Department of Defense (DOD) led an investigation that reasoned that the Air Force's A-X program, the Marine Corps' Harrier, and the Cheyenne were essentially extraordinary that they didn't comprise a duplication of capacities. On 22 October 1971, the Senate Armed Services subcommittee on Tactical Air Power directed hearings to assess the CAS mission and the pending projects. The most harming declaration for the Army's program originated from the administrator of the Air Force's Tactical Air Command, General William W. Momyer, who refered to helicopter loss measurements of Operation Lam Son 719. 

The Army gathered an uncommon team under General Marks in January 1972, to reexamine the prerequisites for an assault helicopter. The motivation behind the Marks Board was to build up a "refreshed and solid" material needs report. The team directed flight assessments of the AH-56, alongside two industry choices for correlation: the Bell 309 King Cobra and Sikorsky S-67 Blackhawk. Examination of the three helicopters verified that the Bell and Sikorsky helicopters couldn't satisfy the Army's prerequisites. 

The Army additionally led a weapons exhibit for the Senate Armed Services Committee in mid 1972, to flaunt the Cheyenne's capability and gather support for assault helicopter improvement. The main TOW rocket that was terminated in the showing fizzled and went into the ground. The second rocket was terminated and hit the objective. Already, 130 TOW rockets had been terminated without disappointment, yet the disappointment of the principal rocket was presently connected to impression of the air ship. In April 1972, the Senate distributed its report on CAS. The report suggested financing of the Air Force's A-X program, which would turn into the A-10 Thunderbolt II, and constrained acquisition of the Harrier for the Marine Corps. The report never alluded to the Cheyenne by name and just offered a tepid proposal for the Army to proceed with obtainment of assault helicopters, inasmuch as their survivability could be improved. 

The Cheyenne program was dropped by the Secretary of the Army on 9 August 1972. The helicopter's vast size and lacking night/all-climate capacity were reasons expressed by the Army for the wiping out. The Cheyenne's simple and mechanical weapons frameworks were getting to be outdated as new computerized frameworks that were increasingly precise, quicker, and lighter were being created. The Cheyenne's unit cost had expanded and was probably going to increment further if new flight were joined. 

On 17 August 1972, the Army started the Advanced Attack Helicopter (AAH) program. AAH looked for an assault helicopter dependent on battle involvement in Vietnam, with a lower top speed of 145â kn (167â mph, 269â km/h) and twin motors for improved survivability. Lockheed offered the CL-1700, a changed variant of the Cheyenne with two motors and discarded the pusher propeller, without progress. The AAH program prompted the AH-64 Apache, which entered administration in the mid-1980s. 

After the retraction, the Army directed an assessment of the seventh Cheyenne furnished with the AMCS flight control framework. The testing demonstrated the AMCS evacuated a large portion of the rest of the control issues, improved soundness, improved taking care of, and diminished the pilot remaining task at hand. With the AMCS, the Cheyenne achieved a speed of 215â kn (247â mph, 398â km/h) in level flight and in a jump accomplished 245â kn (282â mph, 454â km/h); it additionally exhibited improved mobility at high speeds. Model #7 was the last Cheyenne to fly. Lockheed had relied on the Cheyenne to build up itself in the helicopter advertise with its inflexible rotor innovation, however the aspiring venture was ineffective. The firm did not seek after advancement of another helicopter. 

Lockheed proposed a non military personnel variant of the Cheyenne as the CL-1026. This would have been a 30-seater helicopter, however the plan never made it off the planning phase.