Summer Catalog 

"Summer Catalog" is the twentieth scene of the second period of the American parody TV arrangement "Parks and Recreation", and the 26th generally speaking scene of the arrangement. It initially disclosed on NBC in the United States on March 25, 2010. In the scene, Leslie sorts out a gathering with the last four Pawnee park chiefs, yet is baffled when it turns out they loathe one another. Then, Tom attempts to snap a picture of Ann and Mark for the city's mid year index, while the sprouting relationship of Andy and April keeps on creating. 

The scene was composed by Katie Dippold and coordinated by Ken Whittingham. It included a visitor appearance by Michael Gross, best referred to for his job as Steven Keaton from "Family Ties", as one of the previous park executives. As indicated by Nielsen Media Research, "Summer Catalog" was seen by 4.47 million family watchers. It experienced challenge CBS film of the first round of the 2010 NCAA Men's Division I Basketball Tournament, which drew 9.68 million family watchers. "Summer Catalog" got commonly positive audits. 

While chipping away at the Pawnee summer index, Leslie (Amy Poehler) enthusiastically arranges a gathering between Ron (Nick Offerman) and his three antecedents. She envisions an euphoric event and plans to compose a letter about it for the list. In any case, none of the four men coexist with one another, and every one of them are hard to coexist with. One of them (Dakin Matthews) litters over and over, treats everyone rudely, and happily says he never cared the slightest bit about the Parks office and just accepted the position since it had a simple way to employer stability and a worthwhile benefits. Another (Jack Wallace) displays a chauvinist mentality, and reveals to Leslie she ought not be working there because of feminine cycle issues. The third (Michael Gross) always discusses his fondness for pot, venturing to such an extreme as to state "I've planted maryjane in network cultivates over this city," and especially conflicts with Ron (who constrained him out of the position years back) who happily affirms he screwed his forerunner over and generally is his standard disengaged self. Afterward, a baffled Leslie chooses she can't compose the list letter; she quits treating the previous executives with any regard by advising the chauvinist to quiets down and calling them "pieces of poop" when she quickly takes a disposable picture and after that leaves without another word. Ron takes her out to supper to apologize, and the two procedure their common regard for one another, and promise they will never develop to detest each other the manner in which the four previous chiefs do. Ron even reveals to Leslie that he needs her to assume control over his Parks Director position on the off chance that he turns into Pawnee's City Manager. In any case, Ron merrily says in a meeting that one of his first goes about as City Manager is kill the Parks office, while Leslie gives a similarly peppy meeting where she says one of her first goes about as City Manager, were she to jump Ron for the activity, is twofold the office's size. 

Tom (Aziz Ansari) is entrusted with taking the spread photograph of the late spring inventory, and persuades Ann (Rashida Jones) and Mark (Paul Schneider) to posture for photographs at a network park. Tom is over and over disappointed with Ann, who has a troublesome time seeming cheerful. At the point when the photographs are done, Ann concurs that she looks hopeless and asks that the photos not be utilized. Imprint seems worried that Ann's misery is an impression of their relationship. She demands all is well, however he is unconvinced. In the interim, April (Aubrey Plaza) and Andy (Chris Pratt) give off an impression of being developing nearer. In the wake of aiding Leslie set up her cookout, Andy asks whether April needs to get some R&R after work, and she concurs. In any case, when they land at a bar, the bouncer (Mike Mauloff) effectively sees April is underage, and her distinguishing proof affirms she is 20. April reveals to Andy they can go to another bar, however Andy chooses to return home rather, apparently awkward about their age contrast. April is unmistakably frustrated, however does not pass on it to Andy. Afterward, the late spring lists land, with a photograph on the front of April and Andy seeming glad together at the cookout. 

"Summer Catalog" was composed by Katie Dippold and coordinated by Ken Whittingham. The character Michael Tansley, one of the previous parks executives, was played by visitor performer by Michael Gross, best referred to for his job as Steven Keaton from "Family Ties". Toward the finish of the scene, Leslie and Ron eat at J.J's. Diner, a restaurant recently highlighted in the main season scene "The Reporter". Despite the fact that the outside shots of the eatery are the equivalent, the inside arrangement of the burger joint is a totally unique one from the other scene. 

Soon after the scene publicized, a duplicate of the Pawnee Summer Catalog 2010 that was highlighted in the scene was made accessible for download on the official "Parks and Recreation" site. The guide of Pawnee contained inside the inventory is based off the guide of focal Christchurch, New Zealand. Inside seven days of the scene's unique communicate, two erased scenes from "Summer Catalog" were made accessible on the official "Parks and Recreation" site. In the initial, a two-minute clasp, April and Andy be a tease while strolling along a trail to set up Leslie's excursion. At the point when April whines about her feet harming, Andy volunteers to give her a piggyback ride. Afterward, Leslie endeavors to think of her late spring list letter dependent on the outing, yet battles because of how discourteous the four men acted. The second clasp, which kept going two minutes and 15 seconds, incorporates further scenes of Tom driving Ann and Mark through a photograph shoot at the recreation center. Tom constrains them to go into bizarre, cutting edge postures, and hollers at youthful youngsters who hinder the shot while playing. 

Leslie looks at the late spring list to the Pawnee adaptation of "Vogue", a style and way of life magazine. Amid one scene, Tom makes a joke, at that point says, "Am I right, Justin?" The line is a reference to Leslie's beautiful ex Justin, played by performing artist Justin Theroux prior in the season, who Tom frantically respected. When Jerry takes an awful picture for the index, he shows he will utilize the designs programming Adobe Photoshop to change the picture, inciting April to ask, "Can you Photoshop your existence with better choices, Jerry?" 

Amid the excursion, when Andy and April are talking. Andy discusses composing a melody called "Life is a Picnic," Andy makes a reference to NFL quarterback Peyton Manning. 

In its unique American communicate on March 25, 2010, "Summer Catalog" was seen by 4.47 million family unit watchers, as per Nielsen Media Research. For the second week straight, the show endured in contrast with CBS film of the 2010 NCAA Men's Division I Basketball Tournament, which drew a normal of 9.68 million family unit watchers amid "Parks and Recreation's" 8:30 p.m. vacancy. Additionally for the second back to back week, "Parks and Recreation" was outflanked by the ABC dramatization arrangement "FlashForward", which drew 6.2 million family watchers. "Summer Catalog" had an in general 2.9 rating/6 share, and a 3/1 rating/11 share among grown-up watchers between ages 18 and 49. 

"Summer Catalog" got commonly positive audits. Alan Sepinwall, TV writer with "The Star-Ledger", considered the scene a "decent character piece for the greater part of the group", and said it exhibited the amount Leslie has created as a character since the principal season. He adulated the jokes about Ron's craving and the scenes with Tom's requesting photography sessions. "Diversion Weekly" TV essayist Ken Tucker said the storylines moved along energetically, gave a "consistent stream of snickers" and showed the "rich surface" of the characters. Exhaust additionally said the sentiments in "Parks and Recreation" were more reasonable than contemporary ones in shows like "The Office" and "30 Rock". 

Matt Fowler of IGN considered it an "especially solid" scene that utilized the majority of the characters well. Fowler particularly preferred that in spite of the fact that Ron and Leslie squabbled all through the scene, regardless they showed a shared regard for one another. He likewise said Tom's photography sessions were a decent method to show Ann and Mark's falling apart relationship. The A.V. Club essayist Steve Heisler said "Summer Catalog" established the framework for a few future improvements, similar to changes to the Andy/April and Mark/Ann connections, yet additionally kept the scene entertaining and pleasant. Heisler said Tom had the best lines of the scene. Kona Gallagher of TV Squad said she was disheartened by the decrease in Mark and Ann's relationship and the difficulty for the April and Andy romance, and dreaded the subplot probably won't achieve an acceptable end before the finish of the period. Gallagher likewise said the fundamental plot with Leslie and the previous park heads was unsurprising, and that visitor star Michael Gross was underused. 

"Summer Catalog", alongside the other 23 second season scenes of "Parks and Recreation", was discharged on a four-plate DVD set in the United States on November 30, 2010. The DVD included erased scenes for every scene.