De Lackner HZ-1 Aerocycle 

The HZ-1 Aerocycle, otherwise called the YHO-2 and by the maker's assignment DH-4 Heli-Vector, was an American exclusive "individual helicopter" created by de Lackner Helicopters in the mid-1950s. Planned to be worked by unpracticed pilots with at least 20 minutes of guidance, the HZ-1 was relied upon to turn into a standard observation machine with the United States Army. Albeit early testing demonstrated that the specialty had guarantee for giving versatility on the nuclear front line, increasingly broad assessment demonstrated that the air ship was in certainty too hard to even think about controlling for activity by untrained infantrymen, and after a couple of accidents the task was relinquished. A solitary model of the art was put in plain view. 

Amid the mid 1950s, Charles H. Zimmerman of the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA) built up a framework for control of a rotorcraft in which, with the rotors mounted on the underside of the airplane, the machine could be directed by the pilot through the basic moving of his weight, and kept stable through the activities of his normal reflexes. Known as sensation control, and comparable on a fundamental level to the mechanics of riding a bike or a surfboard, it was sought that the idea would permit after pilots to work a flying machine with next to zero preparing time. NACA testing demonstrated that the thought had merit, and a few organizations, including Bensen Aircraft, Hiller Aircraft, and de Lackner Helicopters, started advancement of rotorcraft utilizing the idea. 

The idea proposed by de Lackner Helicopters was a one-man flying stage, and it got the organization assignment "DH-4". The DH-4 was relied upon to have the capacity to convey up to of payload or a helper fuel tank to stretch out its range up to notwithstanding its pilot, a freight lifting line could be strung through the rotor shaft for the conveying of threw stacks underneath the specialty. 

The machine was a straightforward, cross-formed edge, with the pilot remaining on a stage, verified by a security saddle. The bridle likewise verified the air ship's motor, which was a detachable engine made by Mercury Marine. The motor was constrained by a contort hold cruiser style throttle and exchanged capacity to the measurement, contra-pivoting rotors through belt drive with a chain decrease unit. The airplane's arrival gear comprised of airbags toward the finish of each arm of the edge alongside a substantial elastic buoy in the center, taking into consideration land and/or water capable capacity, despite the fact that this course of action was later supplanted by a couple of traditional helicopter-type slides. 

Initially assigned YHO-2 by the U.S. Armed force, at that point later re-assigned HZ-1 and named "Aerocycle", the model made its initially fastened trip on 22 November 1954, with its first free flight occurring in January 1955 at the Brooklyn Army Terminal. More than 160 flights totaling over 15 hours of flight time were directed, and the aftereffects of this early dry run program were viewed as sufficiently promising that twelve instances of the sort were requested (sequential numbers 56-6928 to 56-6939). Expectations were made that the art could give transport to an advanced adaptation of the old steed mounted force, giving airborne "eyes and ears" for the Army. 

In 1956, the test program was exchanged to Fort Eustis, Virginia, where Captain Selmer Sundby took over test-flying obligations. The HZ-1 had been intended to be anything but difficult to fly, and early testing showed that untrained officers could figure out how to work the specialty in under 20 minutes, and some guaranteeing that just five minutes of guidance were required. Moreover, the HZ-1 turned out to be quicker than other flying stage structures assessed by the Army. Sundby, nonetheless, immediately established that the art was significantly more hard to fly than had been normal, and would not be protected in the hands of an unpracticed pilot. Furthermore, the low-mounted rotors turned out to be inclined to kicking up little shakes and different flotsam and jetsam. 

Over a progression of fastened and free-flying experimental drills enduring as long as 43 minutes, the HZ-1 endured a couple of mishaps. The two accidents happened under comparative conditions – the contra-turning rotors intermeshed and impacted, the cutting edges breaking, causing a quick loss of control bringing about an accident. Streamlined testing was directed in the full-scale wind burrow at the Langley Research Center, and it was found that the Aerocycle's advances speed was restricted by a wild pitching movement, however rotor-tip freedom was constantly adequate. The failure to decide the exact reason for the intermeshing, joined with the way that the "individual lifting gadget" idea was neglecting to satisfy its desires, prompted the choice to end the venture. 

Sundby was granted the Distinguished Flying Cross for his test-flying work with the HZ-1, proceeding to test-fly the H-21 and H-34 helicopters, just as observing battle in the Vietnam War before resigning with the position of colonel. 

A completely new kind of parachute with very quick opening qualities, the "Ultra-Fast Opening Personnel Parachute Type XMP-2", was produced for use in testing of the HZ-1 and Hiller VZ-1 flying stages. Intended for use from and at heights as low as , the XMP-2 demonstrated to have inadequate unwavering quality for use as a work force parachute. 

Of the dozen instances of the sort requested by the U.S. Armed force, just a solitary case of the HZ-1 has endure, and this flying machine is as of now in plain view in the U.S. Armed force Transportation Museum at Fort Eustis, Newport News, Virginia.