Fundraiser (Parks and Recreation) 

"Fundraiser" is the 22nd scene of the second period of the American satire TV arrangement "Parks and Recreation", and the 28th by and large scene of the arrangement. It initially publicized on NBC in the United States on May 6, 2010. In the scene, Leslie volunteers to have a philanthropy pledge drive and is given the unappealing 2 a.m. to 6 a.m. move. 

The scene was coordinated by Troy Miller and composed by Amy Poehler, who stars as the hero Leslie Knope, her first content for the arrangement. "Fundraiser" highlighted a visitor appearance by resigned ball player Detlef Schrempf, just as a few performing artists who had recently showed up in "Parks and Recreation", including Mo Collins and Jay Jackson. 

The scene got commonly positive audits and, as per Nielsen Media Research, was seen by 4.03 million family unit watchers, generally equivalent to the earlier week's scene, "94 Meetings". 

Leslie (Amy Poehler) has volunteered to chip away at the 24-hour "Pawnee Cares" diabetes pledge drive and requests everybody in the workplace to work the telephones for numerous movements. Tom (Aziz Ansari) is relegated to get resigned b-ball player Detlef Schrempf from the airplane terminal, the unique visitor for the pledge drive. Leslie is energized in light of the fact that she has been permitted to program her very own four-hour square, yet her associates are vexed to take in it keeps running from 2 a.m. to 6 a.m. Also, she has just been awake for 24 hours making T-shirts for her staff to wear for the fundraiser. 

Amid lunch, Mark (Paul Schneider) reveals to Leslie that he will propose to Ann (Rashida Jones). Ann recommends that Leslie get some rest, yet she anticipates devouring Sweetums bars to remain wakeful for an additional 24 hours. As the fundraiser starts, Leslie is as of now depleted and is nodding off. With time to kill, Tom conveys Detlef to the Snakehole Lounge, yet the proprietor, Freddy (Andy Milder), will not release him in light of the fact that Detlef is bringing a great deal of business, postponing Leslie's huge main event. Andy's (Chris Pratt) band, Mouse Rat, is approached to supplant Detlef, however when they complete the majority of their tunes, Leslie has nothing else to put reporting in real time. Ron (Nick Offerman) volunteers to show how to stick a seat, yet his introduction is boring to the point that the fundraiser really begins to lose cash. 

Edgy for something to put on, Leslie discloses to Mark that he ought to propose to Ann before the camera and he concurs. Not long after, in any case, Ann trusts in Leslie that she needs to part ways with Mark, refering to that he is essentially not the one. In the interim, April (Aubrey Plaza) endeavors to make Andy envious by playing with somebody via telephone, yet it reverse discharges when it ends up being Joe (Kirk Fox) from the Pawnee sewer office. Andy is compelled to show Joe out of the studio when he really touches base to convey April to his van. 

The pledge drive's ability pool turns out to be low to the point that Leslie is compelled to flip a coin before the camera and discussion about her most loved scenes of "Companions". Jerry (Jim O'Heir) is permitted to play the piano, however everybody expels his gifted playing as a racket. Imprint at last comes back to propose and strolls on the set with the ring, yet Leslie stops him by mooning the camera. Detlef Schrempf and Tom at last land toward the finish of Leslie's customizing square. Detlef presents a check for $5,000, permitting the pledge drive to sidestep its $20,000 mark. Notwithstanding being conscious for two days in a row, Leslie goes to Ann's home so they could discuss Mark. She at that point quickly nods off on Ann's love seat for 22 hours. 

"Fundraiser" was coordinated by Troy Miller and composed by Amy Poehler, who stars as "Parks and Recreation" hero Leslie Knope. It was the primary scene she had composed for the show. Right off the bat in the arrangement, Poehler had communicated to "Parks" co-maker Michael Schur that she needed to compose a scene, yet they concurred she would sit tight for a taping break before doing as such. Poehler said the scenes in which Leslie utilizes sugar hurries to re-invigorate herself during the evening, just to crash later, was reminiscent of her very own portion throughout the night encounters taking a shot at the sketch satire arrangement "Saturday Night Live". 

"Pledge drive" included a visitor appearance by Detlef Schrempf, a resigned ball player who played for the Indiana Pacers; "Parks and Recreation" is set in Indiana. Before recording the scene, Schrempf's acting abilities had been constrained to appearances on the American satire arrangement "Wedded... with Children" and the German cleanser musical show "Gute Zeiten, schlechte Zeiten". Schur said of his execution, "For a person who truly never acted in his life, he was extremely interesting." Aziz Ansari kidded about the execution, "We will discount a turn for him called "That is So Detlef", so anticipate that." "Fundraiser" likewise highlighted visitor appearances by a few on-screen characters who had showed up in past scenes, including Mo Collins as "Pawnee Today" TV have Joan Callamezzo and Jay Jackson as Pawnee TV news columnist Perd Hapley. John Balma likewise showed up as Barney, a nearby instructor who gave the gathering of people an amazingly exhausting bookkeeping introduction, similarly as he did in "Leslie's House". 

Notwithstanding the exhibitions, "Pledge drive" incorporated a few references to past scenes. Amid the fundraiser, Andy and his band play out a tune called "Sex Hair". This is a reference to "Galentine's Day", in which he professes to have composed a melody about how one can tell whether somebody engaged in sexual relations in light of the fact that their hair is tangled. A music video for the tune was made accessible on the authority NBC.com "Parks and Recreation" site not long after the scene was communicated. Additionally in "Pledge drive," the TV occasion is supported by the treat producer Sweetums, and Leslie continually eats their Nutri-Yum bars so as to remain wakeful. Both the organization and pieces of candy were conspicuously highlighted by "Sweetums", where Leslie and Ann battled to keep the unfortunate snacks from being sold in Pawnee parks. In different scenes, Tom takes Detlef Schrempf to the Snakehole Lounge, a club where Tom recently bought offers in the scene "Lady of the Year". 

On July 8, 2010, Amy Poehler was selected for the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Comedy Series for her general work in the second season, and her execution in "Pledge drive" was the scene submitted for thought. The honor at last went to Edie Falco for her execution in the Showtime parody arrangement "Medical caretaker Jackie". 

Tom depicts his apparel as "Creeks Brothers Boys", the kids measure line from the men's clothier chain Brooks Brothers. While inebriated, Tom begins to sing music by rapper Soulja Boy Tell Them. So as to slow down for time amid the fundraiser, Leslie begins discussing her most loved scenes of "Companions", a sitcom that recently circulated on NBC. She explicitly alludes to the scene "The One with Chandler in a Box", in which Monica Geller readies a Thanksgiving supper, and Chandler Bing consents to spend the occasion in a case as discipline for kissing Joey Tribbiani's better half. 

Donna makes reference to that her sibling is in Liberia, in actuality, Retta's auntie is the leader of Liberia. 

In its unique American communicate, "Pledge drive" was seen by an expected 4.03 million family watchers, as indicated by Nielsen Media Research. It got a 2.8 rating/5 share among by and large watchers, and a 2.0 rating/7 share among watchers between ages 18 and 49. This rating was about even from the past scene, "94 Meetings". "Fundraiser" was beated in the 8:30 p.m. timeslot by the CBS reality arrangement "" and the Fox wrongdoing show "Bones", however "Parks and Recreation" beat the CW Network heavenly dream arrangement "The Vampire Diaries" and the ABC sci-fi dramatization "FlashForward". 

"Pledge drive" got commonly positive audits. Matt Fowler of IGN lauded the numerous inside jokes and character idiosyncrasies highlighted in the scene. He said in spite of the fact that "The Office" (another satire arrangement by "Parks and Recreation" co-maker Greg Daniels) is constrained for the most part to one setting, "Pledge drive" shows how the "Parks" characters can be put into a bunch of settings and circumstances. "Excitement Weekly" essayist Margaret Lyons stated, "If that wasn’t the best scene of "Parks and Recreation" yet, it’s at any rate top five." Lyons said each character and subplot was in solid structure aside from Ann and Mark, which she said has reliably been the show's "Achilles' heel", and that this scene exhibited how ineffectively it fit with different components of the arrangement. Steve Heisler of The A.V. Club called the scene "one of the greats", guaranteeing it filled in as a spotlight of the solid characters and subplot created during the time season. Heisler likewise said the scene contained a portion of the period's most grounded jokes. "New York" magazine author Steve Kandell said despite the fact that "Fundraiser" propelled the inevitable separation of Mark and Ann, the scene fundamentally filled in as a reason "to grandstand Amy Poehler in fluctuating phases of depletion related ridiculousness". 

"Fundraiser", alongside the other 23 second season scenes of "Parks and Recreation", was discharged on a four-circle DVD set in the United States on November 30, 2010. The DVD included erased scenes for every scene.