Bothersome &amp; Scratchy Land 

"Bothersome and Scratchy Land" is the fourth scene of "The Simpsons"<nowiki>'</nowiki> 6th season. It originally disclosed on the Fox organize in the United States on October 2, 1994. Needing an ideal family excursion, the Simpson family visits Itchy and Scratchy Land. It was composed by John Swartzwelder and coordinated by Wes Archer. 

Bart and Lisa see a business for an event congregation named Itchy and Scratchy Land, and promptly need to visit it. In any case, Marge has effectively reserved a family get-away to a winged creature asylum, yet in the wake of uncovering that the amusement park has a zone for grown-ups, Bart and Lisa prevail upon their folks. 

Albeit going admirably, the family's get-away is destroyed when Bart and Homer get in a bad position for individually propelling a stink bomb into an on-screen character's Itchy suit and kicking another Itchy character in the butt. Both are captured by park security and end up in a confinement cell. 

In the interim, all the Itchy and Scratchy robots denounce any kind of authority and start assaulting people. Bart and Homer are discharged and similarly as Marge is addressing them, all power is cut and a crowd of Itchy and Scratchy robots advance towards them. One of the recreation center representatives will not give them a chance to escape on the helicopter with them because of Homer and Bart's wrongdoings at the recreation center. Homer quickly tosses all that he can at them and finds that the glimmer of a camera shortcircuits the robots' frameworks. The Simpsons at that point snatch many cameras from a shut blessing shop and thrashing the whole Itchy and Scratchy armed force. The family is expressed gratitude toward for sparing the recreation center and concur that it was their best excursion ever, however Marge demands that none of them can ever make reference to it again. 

"Irritated and Scratchy Land", composed by the whole composition group yet credited to John Swartzwelder, was an extremely troublesome scene to create. It included making a completely new condition, which implied a lot of composing and every single new set. At the time that the scene was delivered, new, increasingly stringent control laws had been set up. Accordingly, the Fox organize endeavored to prevent the journalists from including "Bothersome and Scratchy" kid's shows in scenes. Accordingly, the essayists made this scene, which they chose would be as fierce as would be prudent. The system undermined that if the scene was delivered, they would cut the "Irritated and Scratchy" parts out themselves, yet yielded when showrunner David Mirkin took steps to tell the media. The journalists by and by guaranteed to make an effort not to exaggerate the savagery. 

In spite of the fact that the scene was very hard to vivify, "Irritated and Scratchy Land" was "a blessing from heaven" for the artists, as they delighted in invigorating scenes loaded up with brutality. 

A lot of Itchy and Scratchy Land spoofs Disneyland. Euro Itchy and Scratchy Land is a satire of Disneyland Paris, at that point known as EuroDisney, which at the time was fizzling. A few scenes, for example, the helicopter ride, the logo noticeable on the helicopter's side, and certain story components, spoof the Michael Crichton book and film "Jurassic Park". Different pieces of the scene, for example, the recreation center's case to be the "amusement park of things to come" and the expression "where nothing can turn out badly," just as the plot of the robots at the recreation center revolting, depend on another Crichton story, "Westworld". "Scratchtasia" is a reference to the "Magician's Apprentice" fragment of the Disney film "Capriccio", with a few shots and the music satirizing it precisely. Also, the zone where the animation "Scratchtasia" is being appeared and the narrative it is a piece of is reminiscent of the Great Movie Ride pre-appear in MGM Studios at the Walt Disney World Resort in Orlando, Florida. "Pinnitchio" is a satire of the 1940 Disney film "Pinocchio". Hans Moleman being assaulted by ruthless winged animals while in the telephone stall is a farce of the 1963 Alfred Hitchcock film "The Birds". Walt Disney's supposed discrimination against Jews is caricature in the character of Roger Meyers, Sr. in his animation "Nazi Supermen Are Our Superiors". The sound made by the vehicle which takes Bart to the confinement office looks like the one made by the ground transports conveying the military pilots inside the Rebel Base in the 1977 film "Star Wars". Marge's Amish flashback reviews Peter Weir's 1985 film "Witness". 

In its unique communicate, "Bothersome and Scratchy Land" completed 67th in appraisals for the seven day stretch of September 26 to October 2, 1994, with a Nielsen rating of 9.0, proportional to roughly 8.6 million review family units. It was the third most noteworthy evaluated appear on the Fox arrange that week, following "Beverly Hills, 90210", "The X-Files", and tied with "Melrose Place". 

The scene set seventh in a 2003 "Amusement Weekly" rundown of the best 25 scenes of the arrangement, with the creators commenting, "When the animatronics assault, the standoff among man and machine—okay, Homer and a goliath robot mouse—is an uproarious counter to private enterprise run wild." Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood called it "an untypical scene, with a particularly slender plot", however included that "anybody that has been to Disneyland will get the point". The scene is number six on "MSNBC"s top ten "The Simpsons" scenes list, accumulated in 2007. 

In 2014, "The Simpsons" scholars picked "Scratchtasia" from this scene as one of their nine top pick "Bothersome and Scratchy" scenes ever. 

The scene in the blessing shop where Bart finds a customized tag with the name "Bort" has moved toward becoming piece of pop culture, rousing vanity plates among fans and gifts in "The Simpsons"- themed stores at Universal Orlando. Essayist Bill Oakley said he constantly enjoyed the joke yet was astounded it took on an "unbelievable status". "Planet Simpson" creator Chris Turner called the joke "obviously Simpsonian".