I've Got Nothing 

"I've Got Nothing" is a melody discharged by the members of the BBC Two narrative arrangement "Chartjackers" and is credited thusly. The track was delivered by college understudy Marc Dowding and its music video was taped by YouTube client Charlie McDonnell. It was discharged by the record name Swinging Mantis on 9 November 2009 only through the iTunes Store. The single and its discharge were the finished result of a ten-week battle reported on "Chartjackers", which provoked the worldwide online network to compose, record and discharge a pop melody that would make number one on the UK Singles Chart. The tune was composed completely through publicly supporting, with its each perspective, for example, the title, verses, tune and vocalists, having been requested from YouTube clients. 

"I've Got Nothing" was a philanthropy single discharged to profit the UK philanthropy Children in Need. It was sung by vocalists Miranda Chartrand and Adam Nichols, both on the record and at live exhibitions. Its music video included shots of Chartrand and Nichols singing in a London park with Children in Need mascot Pudsey Bear, just as video cuts put together by "Chartjackers" watchers of themselves emulating to the track. The melody was commonly disregarded by music pundits and got for the most part negative reviews—it proceeded to sell a sum of 20,000 duplicates worldwide and earned an outline position of Number 36 in the UK Singles Chart. 

"I've Got Nothing" was written in ten weeks completely through publicly supporting as a component of a venture that was recorded on the BBC Two arrangement "Chartjackers". Individuals from the online network were approached to submit different tune thoughts on the YouTube channel "ChartJackersProject", with the point that a solitary could be composed, recorded and afterward discharged on 9 November 2009. 

The verses for "I've Got Nothing" were composed on the seven day stretch of 8 September. A video presented on the YouTube channel "ChartJackersProject" welcomed watchers to submit conceivable lines as remarks. Watchers posted in excess of 4,000 remarks, from which the tune's verses were chosen. The next week, another video was transferred to "ChartJackersProject" that distributed the triumphant verses and declared that the tune's title was to be "I've Got Nothing"—the tune's melody had been composed by YouTube client "blakeisno1". The video additionally welcomed watchers to form a tune for the finished verses. Watchers submitted 51 songs as video reactions, with the passage from Jonny Dark, a 19-year-old artist from London, being chosen as the victor. 

Another YouTube video was transferred to "ChartJackersProject" on 25 September, offering watchers the chance to tryout to sing "I've Got Nothing" on the last discharge. Hundred of watchers tried out, with ten being chosen to experience as finalists. These ten finalists tried out face to face at the Wellfield Working Men's Club in Rochdale, where Miranda Chartrand, a 19-year-old live in housekeeper from Stroud, Gloucestershire, and Adam Nichols, a 18-year-old artist from Essex, were picked to perform "I've Got Nothing" on the single. 

"I've Got Nothing" was created and co-composed by college understudy Marc Dowding. Dowding found out about the open door through a video presented on the YouTube channel "ChartJackersProject" and was offered the activity after messaging his CV to a BBC Switch maker. Chartrand and Nichols headed out to Newport, South Wales on 7 October to record the single at the account studio of the University of Wales, Newport. On delivering the single, Dowding commented: "It was an extraordinary help to have the capacity to utilize the chronicle studios at the University." 

"I've Got Nothing" was spilled to the web amid October 2009, preceding being authoritatively discharged a month later by record mark Swinging Mantis. As Swinging Mantis was a little record mark, the financial plan for "I've Got Nothing" was constrained, so a physical variant of the single was never made accessible. Rather, the track was made sold solely as an iTunes computerized download. "I've Got Nothing" was discharged worldwide through the iTunes Store at midnight on 9 November. Each duplicate was sold for ³0.79 in the United Kingdom and $0.99 in the United States. 

"I've Got Nothing" was to a great extent overlooked by the predominant press and did not get numerous reviews—the surveys that it received from faultfinders were commonly negative. English music site Popjustice called the exertion "extremely awful", and Ellie Halfacre of Tower Review clarified that "some remarked that the song was awful, and others said it was the verses". Halfacre additionally examined whether the undertaking was concerning self-advancement or philanthropy. David Balls of Digital Spy gave the single three stars out of five, foreseeing that it was "probably not going to make a big deal about a best 40 sway". James Masterton of Yahoo! Music felt that the tune had "fallen far shy of" the objective of achieving number one since it had not had the capacity to "ensure mass open help". Record maker Mike Stock said that the tune had "no executioner tune" and vocalist VV Brown proposed that "the verses could be better". 

Desires for the arrival of "I've Got Nothing" were high. The fundamental objective of "Chartjackers" had been for the melody to achieve number one on the UK Singles Chart, with the abstract of the main scene anticipating that it should "sell an expected 25,000 singles". The single sold right around 20,000 duplicates worldwide and raised ³10,000 for the philanthropy Children in Need. Just shy of 8,400 duplicates were downloaded in the UK, which gave "I've Got Nothing" a diagram putting of Number 36 in the UK Singles Chart. The next week the single dropped out of the UK Top 100. 

The music video for "I've Got Nothing" was altered by YouTube client Charlie McDonnell. It demonstrates different "ChartJackersProject" watchers emulating to the tune, mixed with shots of Chartrand and Nichols singing "I've Got Nothing" in a recreation center. The video was made through publicly supporting, in a way like the composition of the tune itself. On 8 October 2009, watchers were welcomed by means of "ChartJackersProject" to film and submit video clasps of themselves either singing or applauding alongside the track. Shots of Chartrand and Nichols with a performing artist dressed as Children in Need mascot Pudsey Bear were taped in a recreation center. This recording was assembled with a portion of the clasps put together by watchers and used to develop the last music video, which was appeared on British music channels, for example, 4Music and Viva. 

Numerous watchers submitted cuts that were strict translations of the verses. For instance, a few watchers held up awards and trophies for the verse "won the best prize", others focused in without anyone else eye amid the line "investigate my eyes" and others killed lights for the verse "the lights are going out". The vast majority of the shots of Chartrand and Nichols are of them singing "I've Got Nothing" in a recreation center with a performing artist dressed as Pudsey Bear, yet the video likewise includes shots of them eating dessert, swinging around a light post and moving before a tree. The video starts with shots of the team tossing a football forward and backward to one another. At 2:03, the video parts into 35 similarly estimated littler square shapes, each containing a clasp of a "ChartJackersProject" watcher applauding in time with "I've Got Nothing". Throughout the following 18 seconds of the melody, 11 distinct arrangements of 35 watchers (for example roughly 385 watchers altogether) are appeared alongside the melody. The video additionally includes an appearance from YouTube client Peter Oakley at 0:06. 

"I've Got Nothing" was first performed live by Chartrand and Nichols on 4 November 2009 at 93 Feet East in London. Their execution was appeared amid the ninth scene of "Chartjackers". The gig likewise included exhibitions from other YouTube clients and was featured by previous pop star Chesney Hawkes. The melody was performed live for a second time four days after the fact at Switch Live 2009, an entertainment expo sorted out by BBC Switch at the HMV Hammersmith Apollo—the occasion was opened by an exhibition of "I've Got Nothing".