Holy messenger Bakeries 

Holy messenger Bakeries ( "Ma'afiyot Anjel"), otherwise called Angel's Bakery, is the biggest business pastry kitchen in Israel, creating 275,000 portions of bread and 275,000 moves day by day and controlling 30 percent of the nation's bread showcase. With a product offering of 100 unique sorts of bread items and 250 distinct kinds of cakes and treats, Angel sells its merchandise in 32 organization claimed outlets across the nation and disperses to 6,000 stores and many lodgings and armed force bases. It likewise fares to the United States, United Kingdom, France, Belgium and Denmark. 

Established in 1927 in Jerusalem by Salomon Angel, Angel Bakeries acquainted with the Israeli market the principal cut bread, plant-based emulsifiers, and new heating innovations. It has dependably been family-run, at first by Salomon with his siblings and children, at that point by Salomon's grandsons, and today by Salomon's extraordinary grandsons. The organization, Salomon A. Heavenly attendant Ltd., is traded on an open market on the Tel Aviv Stock Exchange, with a turnover of $180 million out of 2008. 

The first Angel's Bakery was set up in Bayit VeGan by Salomon (Shlomo) Angel, a seventh-age Jerusalemite and scion of a Sephardi family that followed its heredity back to Jews who were removed from Spain in 1492. Conceived in the Mishkenot Sha'ananim neighborhood of Jerusalem, Angel was initially an educator in an Alliance school in Jerusalem, where he began to look all starry eyed at the principal’s little girl. Be that as it may, foremost Chaim Farhi would just enable him to wed his girl, Esther, on the off chance that he left educating and "earned a job". Salomon concurred and turned into a dry-merchandise shipper. The couple wedded in 1916 and had three children and three little girls. 

Holy messenger turned into a fruitful dry-merchandise vendor, heading out routinely to Alexandria, Damascus, and Beirut to purchase flour and other fundamental foodstuffs to sell in Jerusalem. In 1927 one of Angel's clients, the Trachtenberg Bakery in Bayit VeGan, went bankrupt. Holy messenger chose to satisfy the pastry shop's obligations and expect possession, getting his dad Avraham and three siblings as accomplices. A couple of years after the fact, two of his siblings, Leon and Refael, left to open their very own bread kitchen in Haifa. 

Heavenly attendant improved the bread-production task by presenting Israel's previously mechanized gauging machines and putting resources into new generation lines. He frequently dozed medium-term at the bread kitchen amid the week and came back to his home in Talpiot when the pastry shop was shut on Shabbat. Later he constructed a condo over the pastry kitchen to house his family. During the 1930s, the bread shop utilized 25 laborers and had one generation line that turned out 8,500 portions for each day. It conveyed bread to stores in two trucks and a steed and wagon. Amid World War II, the pastry shop contracted to supply bread to the British armed force, requiring the buy of expansive American-made broilers that could turn out 540 portions for each hour. 

Blessed messenger's Bakery assumed a key job in nourishing Jerusalem occupants amid the 1948 War of Independence. At the point when Arabs lay attack to the city and assaulted caravans that endeavored to bring nourishment and supplies through the restricted mountain go from Tel Aviv, water and flour were hard to find. Fire engines were utilized to carry water to the bread shop and "flour was cleared up off the pastry shop floor". Blessed messenger's child Danny, who was a Haganah contender shielding the assaulted Old City, reviewed that the pastry shop would send bread in escorts to the warriors in the Old City and Mount Scopus, and shroud weapons and ammo in the sacks of bread. One of the principal steeds utilized for the Jewish attack on the Arabs' Old City positions originated from Angel's Bakery; its feet were enveloped by old flour sacks so the British wouldn't identify it. 

During the 1950s Salomon's three children, Avraham, Ovadia and Danny, accepted administrative positions; they progressed toward becoming co-CEOs after Salomon's passing in 1966. In 1958 Angel's Bakery moved to its present area in the Givat Shaul modern zone at the side of Beit Hadfus and Farbstein Streets. The site was picked in light of the fact that it remained over the road from a flour factory. The Angel siblings assembled Israel's first flour storehouse and appointed a Texas organization to build a 750-foot pipeline to pass on flour legitimately from the plant to the storehouse to the pastry shop. Today this pipeline conveys 120 tons of flour to the bread kitchen every day. The innovation, at first restricted by the Jerusalem district for being over the ground, won the Kaplan Prize for qualification in profitability and productivity. 

Likewise in 1965, the siblings presented new long broilers and plying machines. That equivalent year, they delivered the nation's originally cut bread and bread containing soy flour. 

To enter the entire wheat bread showcase, the pastry kitchen imported its very own wheat-cleaning machine from Hungary; the machine really must be carried out since Hungary did not have discretionary relations with Israel at the time. Be that as it may, wellbeing nourishment shoppers were careful about the primary entire wheat portions since they were white, not dark colored. Working with the Health Food Association, Angel's concocted the arrangement of adding all-common molasses to the bread to give it a dark colored shading. 

Heavenly attendant's built up the main generation line in Israel with the ability to create 3,300 portions of bread for each hour. Thirteen other bread creation lines in its different plants each yield more than 2,000 portions for each hour. One generation line in Jerusalem has the ability to turn out 10,000 pitas in three hours. On every day of the eight-day Hanukkah celebration, the Jerusalem plant likewise fries up 250,000 sufganiyot, the jam filled donut supported by Israelis at this season. 

The pastry kitchen's carefully controlled stoves persistently modify temperatures to oblige the maturing and preparing forms; these broilers can likewise heat diverse kinds of bread at various temperatures on the top and base of every stove. Notwithstanding the accentuation on development and computerization, Angel's challahs are as yet plaited by hand. 

Heavenly attendant's Bakery opened its milestone industrial facility store contiguous the Givat Shaul plant in 1984. The store offers a full determination of bundled breads, rolls, and biscuits, bourekas, danishes, extravagant cakes, high quality baked goods, espresso and soda pops. For a long time, guests could watch dough punchers twist challot through a substantial side window. Toward the finish of the Passover occasion, a long queue of clients generally frames outside the store after 12 pm, holding on to purchase the principal bread off the generation line. 

Likewise in 1984, the organization started delivering cakes and cakes in a processing plant in Jerusalem, and starting during the 1990s it started building and gaining different bread shops in a move to differentiate its items and advertising base. It manufactured another bread kitchen in Lod in 1995 and obtained the Tuv Tam pastry shop in Netivot in 1999. Today the organization claims and works five plants: 

The organization has expanded into the heating of breads with unique grains and included dietary filaments, decreased calorie and nutrient invigorated breads, and ensured natural items. 

In 2002, it presented parbaked pita, challah, rolls, crusty bread, "craftsman" breads, and pizza bases, which are streak solidified and sold to clients or stores that total the heating procedure themselves for a fresher item. 

With regards to government guidelines, Angel Bakeries additionally delivers a few assortments of cost controlled bread (, "lechem achid") for the low-pay division. 

In the late 1990s, the organization opened a chain of bistro/bakeshops in four Jerusalem shopping locale. Other than selling the organization's pastry kitchen crisp merchandise, the Angel Cafe serves plates of mixed greens, sandwiches, pasta dishes, treats, espressos, and soda pops. 

Blessed messenger Bakeries claims an armada of 200 trucks that vehicle its items to 32 organization possessed outlets, 6,000 stores, and many inns and armed force bases all through Israel. The dispersion plan is completely modernized and intended to work on an "in the nick of time" premise: All the bread that should be conveyed to a particular area is modified to fall off the generation line directly before it is stacked onto a truck and sent off, ensuring most extreme freshness. 

Blessed messenger Bakeries is an affirmed provider to the Domino's Pizza chain in Israel, and the sole provider of cheeseburger buns to McDonald's eateries in Israel. It additionally fares to the United States, United Kingdom, France, Belgium and Denmark. As far as information, the organization utilizes more than 5,000 tons of flour for each month. 

In light of a legitimate concern for keeping the bread genuine (Angel Bakeries conveys the hechsher of both the Edah HaChareidis and the Orthodox Union), Angel's child Ovadia, a prepared scientific expert, worked together with others at the Angel's-claimed Adumim Chemicals plant to build up another recipe for the emulsifiers that dilemma water and oil in the bread-production process. In those early days, emulsifiers were made with creature based fats which were not fit. Ovadia Angel and his group created emulsifiers from hydrogenated fats, a vegetable-based source, and later sold this new learning to different organizations. 

Another kashrut challenge which the pastry kitchen defeated in the mid 1950s concerned the capacity to deliver crisp bread available to be purchased on Sunday mornings after the plant had been shut for Shabbat as per Jewish law. Ordinarily batter takes four to six hours to rise, yet the pastry shop gained a blender made by Tweedy of Burnley, England, which could create mixture in just two hours, consequently enabling the bread kitchen to prepare bread on Saturday night in time for Sunday-morning conveyances. Today Angel Bakeries possesses nine such blenders, five of which are utilized in its Jerusalem plant. 

Holy messenger Bakeries works all year with the exception of Shabbat, Yom Tov, and Passover week. As per Jewish law, it every year pitches its stock to a non-Jew before Passover with the goal that it doesn't possess chametz over the occasion. 

Heavenly attendant's was the primary Israeli bread kitchen to open up to the world on the Tel Aviv Stock Exchange, in 1984. In any case, it remains a privately-run company. During the 1980s Salomon’s grandkids moved into administrative positions. Avraham, the oldest sibling, who headed the monetary division, was prevailing by his little girl Ruthie. Ovadia go down the directorship of generation and innovation to his child Gadi. Danny gave over the organization directorship to his child Yaron. 

Heavenly attendant Bakeries utilizes 1,800 laborers, including Israelis, Palestinians, and new outsiders. A portion of its laborers are third-age representatives. In its more than 80-year history, the pastry kitchen has never had a strike. 

The crossing point of Kanfei Nesharim and Farbstein Streets, on the northeastern corner of the bread shop, was named Shlomo Angel Square by the Jerusalem district out of appreciation for the organization's originator. 

Danny Angel (1920–2009), who worked in the privately-owned company from the age of 7 until his demise at age 89 was the open essence of the organization. He was the beneficiary of numerous honors, including the Jerusalem Prize, Worthy Citizen of Jerusalem, and Notable Industrialist. He was leader of the Manufacturers Association of Israel, the Rotary Club of Israel, and the Variety Club of Israel, which he helped found. He had numerous companions in the political echelon also. In acknowledgment of their long-lasting companionship, Jerusalem civic chairman Teddy Kollek dependably gave Danny Angel a privileged spot at the base of his discretionary rundown. In 2008, mayoral applicant Nir Barkat proceeded with the custom and put Angel's name at the base of his discretionary rundown. Blessed messenger's memorial service was gone to by Prime Minister Ehud Olmert, Likud party pioneer Benjamin Netanyahu, and other government authorities. 

Joe Angel, an incredible extraordinary grandson of Salomon Angel who, similar to his cousins, assisted at the family bread kitchen in Jerusalem, moved to the United States in 1969 and earned a degree in pastry shop the board from Kansas State University. In 1981 he opened his very own Angel's Bakery in Brooklyn, New York, spend significant time in biscuits, treats and cakes.