Kevin Lowe (lacrosse) 

Kevin E. Lowe is a money official and resigned proficient lacrosse player who played proficient box lacrosse in the National Lacrosse League and expert field lacrosse in Major League Lacrosse from 1995 to 2006. He featured as an individual from the Princeton Tigers men's lacrosse group from 1991 through 1994 and was drafted into the Lacrosse Museum and National Hall of Fame in 2009, joining his sibling and father. He was a secondary school and school lacrosse United States Intercollegiate Lacrosse Association (USILA) All-American. Lowe has the qualification of being the main player in lacrosse history to score an extra time objective in a NCAA Men's Lacrosse Championship amusement and a Major League Lacrosse Steinfeld Cup title diversion. He holds various Princeton scoring records and once held the Ivy League single-season helps record. As a school senior, he was respected as the National Collegiate Athletic Association's best lacrosse attackman and the Ivy League's best player. In his four-year school vocation, Princeton won its initial two NCAA competition Championship, two Ivy League Championships and earned four NCAA Men's Lacrosse Championship competition solicitations. 

He is the sibling of 1992 Division I Player of the Year and Hall of Famer Darren Lowe and child of Hall of Famer Alan Lowe. Alan, who was the long-term Manhasset High School mentor, had won both a World Lacrosse Championship and NCAA Men's Lacrosse Championship. Lowe was a secondary school All-American from Mineola, New York who got various prep awards: National High School North/South Lacrosse All-Star Game (1990), Nassau County All-Star Game (1990) and Empire State Games (1989). Lowe is at present hitched with three youngsters. As a young he played soccer, the quarterback position in American football and the point protect position in b-ball. He is at present a stockbroker on Wall Street. 

Counting the 2009 season, Lowe holds the fifth most astounding vocation aggregate in NCAA Division I with 174 helps. Lowe holds various Princeton University scoring records (vocation focuses, profession helps, single-amusement helps, back to back diversions with a point, and focuses by a green bean). He once in the past held the school records for single-season focuses and single-season helps. Lowe in the past held the Ivy League vocation helps record. In any case, since the Ivy League utilizes meeting diversions just, Ryan Boyle currently holds the profession helps record in spite of the fact that Lowe holds the school record. Lowe is the main Tiger to have scored a point in the majority of Princeton's recreations amid his profession (Boyle scored in all amusements he played yet missed 4 diversions). His last vocation objective secured the 1994 NCAA Division I Men's Lacrosse Championship for the Tigers in additional time. Princeton was 52–8 amid Lowe's profession, incorporating a 7–2 record in four NCAA competitions. The 1992 and 1993 groups were undefeated 6–0 inside and out Ivy League champions, 

As a first year recruit, on April 6, 1991, he drove number three positioned Princeton to a 17–9 triumph over Yale. It was Princeton's first triumph over Yale since 1986. Lowe had nine helps, which set a school single-diversion record. Starting at 2010, this keeps on being a Princeton single-amusement record. After the tenth round of the period, Lowe kept on driving the country in helps. He was the main scorer in Princeton's group that won the 1992 NCAA Division I Men's Lacrosse Championship to win its first NCAA competition. As a senior in 1994, his 73 aids group diversions broke his sibling Darren's 1992 Ivy League single season record and earned him Ivy League Player of the Year respects. In the 1994 NCAA Division I Men's Lacrosse Championship amusement, he scored the diversion winning objective in abrupt demise extra time against Virginia. After Princeton won the go head to head, the objective went ahead the main shot on objective of additional time. At the point when his university qualification finished, he had the four most elevated single-season help aggregates in school history. 

Lowe was the Jack Turnbull Award and Men's Ivy League Player of the Year Award champ for 1994. He was a first group USILA All-American Team choice in 1994 and a second group choice in 1992 and 1993. He was a four-time All-Ivy League choice and three-time first group All-Ivy League choice (1992, 1993, and 1994) 

Lowe played in the indoor National Lacrosse League from 1995 to 2001 and the open air Major League Lacrosse from 2003 to 2006. He played with the New York Saints of the NLL in 1995, 1996, 2000 and 2001. At that point he played in the MLL with the Long Island Lizards in 2003 and 2004 and the Philadelphia Barrage in 2006. In 2003, he was chosen to his first MLL All-Star Game, he was harmed and rather filled in as an associate mentor amid the amusement. He was driving the group in helps and had tied the association single-amusement helps record (6) preceding damage. He and his sibling were colleagues for the United States at the 2002 World Lacrosse Championship, where they won the title. In the elimination round match against the Iroquois Nation, he scored four objectives and had a help. His additional time objective in the 2003 MLL Championship amusement earned the Long Island Lizards the Steinfeld Cup. It happened just 22 seconds into the extra time frame to give the Lizards the triumph over the Baltimore Bayhawks whom they had met in every one of the initial three MLL titles. Lowe scored four objectives and included an aid the 15–14 triumph to procure the MLL Championship MVP grant. Lowe, who was second in the MLL with 20 helps, harmed his knee amid the 2004 season and missed the remainder of the year. 

Coming up next are his NLL vocation details: 

Coming up next are his MLL vocation details: