Completely turned inside out (Cougar Town) 

"Completely turned inside out" is the main scene of the second period of the American TV sitcom "Cougar Town". It initially broadcast on September 22, 2010 in the United States on ABC. In this scene, Jules (Courteney Cox) sees a specialist named Glenn (Jennifer Aniston) so as to soothe the worries of her issues. In the interim, Bobby (Brian Van Holt) is messed with the truth of Grayson's (Josh Hopkins) association with Jules, and Travis (Dan Byrd) plans for school. 

"Completely turned inside out" was coordinated by co-maker Bill Lawrence and composed by Lawrence and individual co-maker Kevin Biegel. Aniston showed up in "Completely turned inside out", following a time of substantial theory. Lawrence felt that her appearance denoted a progress in viewership suppositions on the show, and opined that the arrangement had blocked from its unique idea. 

The scene was generally welcomed by correspondents, who adulated the storyline and Aniston's execution. Upon beginning airing, it accomplished 8.35 million watchers and a 3.3/9 rating in the 18–49 statistic, as indicated by Nielsen evaluations. "Completely turned inside out" turned into the third most elevated appraised scene of the arrangement, and proceeded to turn into the most elevated evaluated portion of the period. 

To help with the worries of her different issues – understanding her new association with Grayson, managing Travis leaving for school, and attempting to fit Bobby into her life – Jules (Courteney Cox) has begun to see another advisor, Glenn (Jennifer Aniston). Jules can relate well to Glenn, especially on the grounds that Glenn appears to have a mother-child bond with her child, Gabriel, as close as Jules has with Travis. Ellie (Christa Miller) is doubtful about Glenn's capabilities, and envious that Jules currently wants to discuss her issues with Glenn rather than her. 

Grayson (Josh Hopkins) concludes that he needs to go through multi day from Jules for some space, sending Jules spiraling. She begins finding Glenn outside of treatment sessions to talk. In the end, Jules finds that Gabriel isn't Glenn's child, but instead a pet canine; after the subsequent contention, Glenn advises Jules to discover another advisor. Jules then returns to depending on Ellie for counsel. 

Andy (Ian Gomez) finds that a photo of Jules on a publicizing seat has been destroyed, so he, Bobby (Brian Van Holt) and Grayson stake out the seat to get the guilty party. Grayson rapidly understands that Bobby mutilated the seat; Bobby trusts in Grayson that he's not by any means serenely yet with Grayson's and Jules' relationship, however demands that their kinship is still close. 

Laurie (Busy Philipps) wagers Travis (Dan Byrd) twenty dollars that she can remain conscious longer than him. Laurie cheats, taking rests at each conceivable chance, tolerating that she will lose the wager, however appreciating the chance to disturb Travis. At the point when the wager is finished, they recognize the amount they will miss each other when Travis leaves for school. 

Performer Jennifer Aniston showed up on "Totally turned around". Theories of her appearance at first surfaced a year before the affirmation, and after becoming aware of it, "Cougar Town" co-maker Bill Lawrence at first upheld such charges. Lawrence expressed that he declared that Aniston would show up on the TV arrangement, yet had not reached her or her delegates. In the end, Lawrence deflected far from his cases and expressed that "nothing's occurred yet". He proceeded in his meeting with E! On the web: "I'd murder to get Jennifer on the show, and in the event that I had any tendency it was going on, I would tell everyone 'cause I don't generally give a sh-t. I would love it to occur and the second it did I would tell everyone on the planet, yet nothing's occurred." 

Lawrence affirmed her appearance in July 2010 and uncovered that Aniston accomplished the job of Bonnie, the therapist for Jules. "Sort of a get-excessively engaged with her-life-kind of advisor," he countered. "Those folks are so close, in actuality, they sort of do that for one another at any rate. Bonnie has the life Jules wishes she has." Aniston had recently worked with Courteney Cox in the American sitcom "Companions", and again on the sequential show "Earth". Aniston turned into the second cast part from "Companions" to show up on the TV arrangement, succeeding Lisa Kudrow, who recently showed up in the season one scene "Rhino Skin", additionally assuming the job of a restorative expert (explicitly, a dermatologist). 

Cox needed the show to set up itself before choosing an appearance by Aniston. Lawrence expressed that it required an impressive length of investment to establish on the framework of "Cougar Town"; "And once we did and once it was clicking, I imagine that in addition to the fact that Courteney felt happy with conversing with Jen about doing it, however agreeable in how interesting she supposes the show is and that Jen might want it and fit into this world actually well." He included: "It begins and finishes with Courteney and Jennifer being extremely incredible companions and eager to cooperate again—especially doing satire together. Consistently that those two talk they have more thoughts regarding [the role]. It's certainly something they’re both associated with innovatively." 

Bill Lawrence communicated that he trusted that Aniston's visitor appearance would stamp a defining moment in viewership assessments, and felt that the show had separated itself from its unique idea. "I need the same number of individuals as I can get the chance to perceive what the show sort of turned out to be a year ago," Lawrence enunciated. "It went from a normal TV show endeavoring to end up to something that I’m extremely pleased with and like and believe is extremely entertaining." 

"Completely turned inside out" was initially communicated on September 22, 2010 in the United States on ABC. After airing, the scene accumulated 8.35 million watchers, notwithstanding airing all the while with scenes of "Hellfire's Kitchen" on Fox, "Criminal Minds" on CBS, "" on NBC, and "Hellcats" on The CW. It achieved a 3.3/9 rating among individuals the 18–49 statistic, as indicated by Nielsen appraisals. "Completely turned inside out" accomplished the arrangement's most astounding all out viewership in a year, and earned the most astounding rating in the 18–34 statistic of the night in its particular timeslot, collecting a 3.0/9 rating. The scene turned into the third-most noteworthy appraised scene of "Cougar Town", just as the most astounding evaluated scene of its second season. 

"Completely turned inside out" was generally welcomed by TV pundits. Todd VanDerWerff of "The A.V. Club" issued the scene a B+ evaluation, and felt that the scene was better than those of the show's first season. He declared: ""Cougar Town" hasn't made as large of a stride up from season one to season two as it did from the initial segment of season one to the last piece of season one. Be that as it may, the progression from 'normal' to 'great' was the simple part. Season two is where watchers are going to see whether the show has the stuff to make the little advances expected to get from 'great' to 'incredible'. Every sign it's en route there in the debut since it's at last begun to grapple with a portion of the knottier inquiries at its middle." HitFix essayist Alan Sepinwall opined that the show deflected from its unique reason; "It's turned out to be one of my most loved comedies, and whether you care about Aniston or not, this evening is a decent time to test it in the event that you rejected it a year ago in light of the title, the first reason or a portion of those early scenes." 

Reporters refered to Jennifer Aniston's appearance as the feature of the scene. "Excitement Weekly" Annie Barrett commended the communications among Aniston and Cox; "Their collaborations were along the lines of what I envision it would have been similar to if Rachel's character had all of a sudden chosen she had turned into a wizard." Kevin Fallon of "The Atlantic" reverberated synonymous considerations, and felt that Aniston's execution helped the crowd to remember her star control. Fallon expressed: "Aniston's execution was wonderfully strange and offbeat—and comedically sharp, a much needed development from the nonexclusive and dull film jobs she's played in the years since "Companions" finished. The previous evening's execution spotlighted her endowments as a character actress—and filled in as a disappointing notice of what we've been absent since she has [all but] surrendered that specialty of acting." Sepinwall communicated that Aniston "absolves herself fine and dandy in the little job of Jules' erratic new advisor. She's amiable and daffy however never ridiculous." "Hollywood Life" writer Laura Schreffler was not as excited as the general accord, affirming that Aniston's visitor appearance was overhyped and a "celebrated appearance". Schreffler included that Cox dominated her, declaring that she "is still far progressively funny".