Bart's Comet 

"Bart's Comet" is the fourteenth scene of "The Simpsons"<nowiki>'</nowiki> 6th season. It initially disclosed on the Fox arrange in the United States on February 5, 1995. In the scene, Bart Simpson coincidentally finds a comet, which is going towards Springfield. The show's composition staff saw an issue of "Time" magazine that displayed the danger of comets hitting Earth on its spread, and chose to make a scene in a comparable vein. John Swartzwelder composed the content, while Bob Anderson coordinated. "Bart's Comet" contains references to "Where's Waldo?" and "The Twilight Zone", and got positive acclamations from analysts. 

After Bart subverts Principal Skinner's climate swell, Skinner chooses to rebuff him by having Bart help with Skinner's beginner space science. Bart inadvertently finds a comet, and researchers before long find that it is setting out straight toward Springfield. Educator Frink plans to dispatch a rocket at the comet, dissipating everybody's feelings of trepidation. Nonetheless, the rocket undershoots the comet and wrecks the main extension away. 

Homer chooses that his family should remain in the reinforced hideout that Ned Flanders constructed, and soon, the remainder of the townspeople arrive. Homer is unfit to close the entryway, so Ned is kicked out. In the long run, Homer feels remorseful and leaves also, trailed by the other townspeople, and they all combine on a slope with Ned to anticipate passing. As the comet enters the air, it wrecks in the thick layer of contamination over Springfield and just devastates the asylum, leaving the remainder of the town safe. 

The scene was composed by John Swartzwelder and coordinated by Bob Anderson. In the wake of seeing an issue of "Time" magazine, which displayed the danger of comets hitting Earth on its spread, the composition staff chose to have a scene dependent on the idea of a comet hitting Springfield. They fleshed out the scene's plot more than a few days and Swartzwelder then started composition the subtleties of the content. As per showrunner David Mirkin, instances of "Swartzwelder humor" in the scene incorporate the American military pilots confusing Groundskeeper Willie with an Iraqi fly and slicing to Grampa and Jasper outside a 1940s general store. For the reinforced hideout scene, the mass of townspeople was developed on numerous layers so it was simpler to energize. 

Kent Brockman's rundown of gay individuals is made out of the show's creation staff, who needed to consent to lawful arrangements that they would not sue their very own show. Subsequently, as indicated by show maker Matt Groening, a large number of the staff show up on arrangements of gay individuals on the Internet. The scene denotes the principal appearance of Database, a character Groening detests in the event that he is utilized for anything over one line. 

Mirkin believes the scene to be one of his record-breaking top picks, considering it an "impeccable "Simpsons" scene" because of the extent of the plot, feeling and observational cleverness. 

The love seat choke is a reference to the movement of Fleischer Studios. The group of stars of the Three Wise Men is an illustration of The Three Stooges. The townspeople yanking their collars after the rocket pulverizes the main scaffold away is a reference to Charles Nelson Reilly's execution in "The Ghost and Mrs. Muir". Waldo from "Where's Waldo?" shows up close to the upper left of a casing amid the main gathering shot in the reinforced hideout, copying the style of the "Where's Waldo?" books. The reinforced hideout scenes depended on "The Twilight Zone" scenes "The Shelter" and "The Monsters Are Due on Maple Street". The scene makes references to "Back to the Future", including when Professor Frink inadvertently sets his town demonstrate ablaze, much the same as Doc Brown. The Super Friends are named after the 1970s depiction of a similar name and as the comet approaches Springfield, the townspeople sing "Que Sera", a melody initially recorded by Doris Day for Alfred Hitchcock's 1956 film "The Man Who Knew Too Much". 

In its unique communicate, "Bart's Comet" completed joint 33rd (with "The X-Files" and "Hangin' with Mr. Cooper") in the appraisals for the seven day stretch of January 3 to February 5, 1995, with a Nielsen rating of 11.3. It was the fourth most astounding evaluated appear on the Fox arrange that week. 

Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood, the writers of the book "I Can't Believe It's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide", considered it a "fantastic scene" and commended the "extraordinary minute when the ever-devout Maude Flanders cheerfully forfeits her Neddy". Mikey Cahill of the "Envoy Sun" picked the scene's blackboard choke, "Cursive composing does not mean what I figure it does", as one of his most loved writing slate chokes ever of show. Colin Jacobson of DVD Movie Guide said in a survey of the 6th season DVD that he didn't "share a similar dimension of energy for it" as Mirkin, finishing up: "I think it gives a reliably solid show. It extends reality a bit, yet that’s not a problem–or uncommon for the series–and the program winds up as a positive one." Ryan Keefer of DVD Verdict gave the scene a B-. Television faultfinders Matt Zoller Seitz and Alan Sepinwall refered to the scene as how "The Simpsons" "dependably had the way of life and the species at the forefront of its thoughts notwithstanding when it was playing near", indicating the minute close to the finish of the scene when the camera gradually skillet over the Springfieldians' countenances in the reinforced hideout while Ned Flanders sings "Que Sera": "a snapshot of existential fear that offers approach to effortless renunciation." In the July 26, 2007 issue of "Nature", the logical diary's article staff recorded "Bart's Comet" among "The Top Ten science minutes in "The Simpsons"".