Inept in Love 

"Inept in Love" is a melody recorded by Barbadian artist Rihanna for her fourth studio collection, "Appraised R" (2009). The tune was composed by Shaffer Smith, Mikkel S. Eriksen and Tor Erik Hermansen, with creation helmed by StarGate. Ne-Yo filled in as the associate maker. It was composed two days before Rihanna and afterward sweetheart Chris Brown's squabble the evening of the 2009 Grammy Awards, which happened on February 8, 2009. The expressive substance, which depicts a harsh relationship, drove Ne-Yo to portray the tune as a "feeling". 

"Dumb in Love" is a R&B control ditty. Instrumentation is given by finger snapping, minor piano keys and piano riffs. The verses of the melody rotate around a female hero who understands that she needs to get away from a damaging and two-faced beau. "Dumb in Love" got a blended to positive reaction from music pundits. A few pundits commended Rihanna's passionate conveyance of the melody while others scrutinized it as being excessively dim. Upon the arrival of "Evaluated R", the tune topped at number seven on the South Korea Gaon International Chart on December 27, 2009. 

"Dumb in Love" was composed by Shaffer Smith, under his stage name Ne-Yo, and Mikkel S. Eriksen and Tor Erik Hermansen, under their creation name StarGate. Ne-Yo filled in as the associate maker. The tune was recorded in 2009 at Metropolis Studios, London. There additionally is a form of the tune recorded by American vocalist Brandy. On February 8, 2009, Rihanna's planned execution at the 2009 Grammy Awards was dropped. Reports later surfaced in regards to a supposed quarrel with then sweetheart, vocalist Chris Brown, who was captured on doubt of making criminal dangers. On March 5, 2009, Brown was accused of ambush and making criminal dangers. In the months that continued the quarrel, both Rihanna and Brown kept low profiles and evaded media consideration. 

In a meeting for MTV News, co-essayist of "Inept in Love" Ne-Yo, who had worked together with Rihanna on her past collections "A Girl like Me" (2006) and "Great Girl Gone Bad" (2007), elucidated that he would not compose a melody for Rihanna concerning Brown as he thought that it was superfluous and as a result of his kinship with Brown. Maker Chuck Harmony agreed with Ne-Yo's announcement, saying that regardless of what tune Rihanna discharged as the lead single individuals would quickly imagine that the tune is about Brown. In a meeting with "USA Today", Ne-Yo later uncovered that the tune was composed two days before Rihanna and Brown's quarrel, refering to it as "a feeling." In a meeting with Sway Calloway for MTV News at "Appraised R"s review in New York City, Rihanna expressed that the collection spoke to her trustworthiness and vulnerbility. Amid the see, Calloway noticed that "Inept in Love" was the tune destined to get correlations with Brown, with accentuation on the verse "despite everything I adore you, however I can't do this/I might be moronic yet I'm not dumb." 

"Idiotic in Love" is a R&B control anthem which goes on for 4:01 (four minutes, one moment). Instrumentation is given by finger snapping, minor piano keys and piano riffs, a style of rehashed harmony movement. The verses of "Moronic in Love" spin around a lady in a damaging and two-timing relationship, advancing to the female hero abandoning her sweetheart. The melody starts with the line "Let me let you know somethin'/Never/Have I ever/Been a size 10 in my entire life." Rihanna sings the line "This is moronic/I'm not dumb/Don't converse with me/Like I'm idiotic" amid the ensemble. The scaffold comprises of Rihanna singing "Attempting to make this work/yet you act like a twitch." As verified by Rob Harvilla of "The Village Voice", the extension speaks to the minute when Rihanna understands that it isn't worth her time and energy to remain in the relationship, expressing "the dullard top is off". "Inept in Love" contains an expressive similitude, "Blood staring you in the face." 

"Dumb in Love" gathered blended to positive audits from music pundits. Leah Greenblatt for "Diversion Weekly" adulated Rihanna's abnormal state of passionate conviction on "Moronic in Love", composing that it is a bit of "self-slashing balladry." Neil McCormick for "The Daily Telegraph" felt that the tune was an immediate reference to Rihanna and Brown, expressing "Rihanna famously got a bruised eye preceding the 2009 Grammy grants when she was assaulted by her then sweetheart, R&B vocalist Chris Brown. Unmistakably, this is a possibly groundbreaking episode, and we get some feeling of the enthusiastic consequence on the song Stupid In Love." Norman Mayers for Nu-Soul Magazine agreed with McCormick, composing that Rihanna does not timid far from what occurred among herself and Brown, rather, she goes up against it straightforwardly on "Inept in Love". Alex Thornton for HipHopDX composed that it is hard to tune in to the tune without considering "you know who," alluding to Brown. 

Michaelangelo Matos for "The A.V. Club" composed that "Moronic in Love" sounded more like a treatment sessions than a melody. Ryan Dombal of Pitchfork Media was disparaging of the melody, naming it as "very diminish." Emily Tartanella for Popmatters was not inspired by the tune, composing Stupid in Love' may go for something more, however they touch base at something less." Chris Richards for "The Washington Post" composed that "Dumb in Love", alongside the lead single discharged from the collection "Russian Roulette", comprised of "trudging beats" and "forgettable snares". Richards proceeded in his survey to compose that the tune is about "melancholy admissions to the treacliest of tunes." Eric Henderson for Slant Magazine was reproachful of the initial six melodies on "Evaluated R" ("Mad House", "Sit tight", "Hard", "Inept in Love", "Rockstar 101" and "Russian Roulette") were "dreary and steady." 

Credits adjusted from the liner notes of "Appraised R", Def Jam Recordings. 

Upon the arrival of "Appraised R", "Inept in Love" appeared at number eight on the South Korea Gaon International Chart on December 27, 2009. The next week, it topped at number seven for two back to back weeks.