Church of St Nicholas, Sapareva Banya 

The Church of St Nicholas (, "tsarkva „Sveti Nikola“") is a little medieval Eastern Orthodox church in the southwestern Bulgarian town of Sapareva Banya, which is a piece of Kyustendil Province. Initially either the property of a nearby striking or joined to a bigger church, it was built whenever from the eleventh to the fourteenth century. 

The congregation was manufactured utilizing red blocks and white mortar. Compositionally, it is of a basic Byzantine cross-in-square plan, with a solitary nave and apse. The frescoes in the inside are just hardly protected. It was reproduced in 1937 in the wake of falling into ruin, and it was recorded as a landmark of culture of national significance in 1968. 

Researchers differ on the conceivable time of the congregation's development; appraisals run from the 11th–12th, through the 12th–13th, to the 13th–14th century. In an article in the "Bulgarian Church Review" magazine from 1898, the nearby cleric Mihal Popov was refered to as saying that a stone from the congregation raised area was uncovered amid unearthings. The cleric trusted that the stone, which supposedly had the date 1160 engraved on it, was sent to the National Archeological Museum in the capital Sofia. 

Because of its minor size, the Church of St Nicholas was most likely not built as a free church. A legend connects the congregation to the name of a unidentified nearby primitive ruler named Nikola (Nicholas) as his last resting spot, however paleontologist Nikola Mavrodinov thinks of it as more probable that it was potentially a house of prayer or a burial ground church appended to a bigger spot of love. The bigger church was maybe pulled down amid the early Ottoman standard of Bulgaria (post-fourteenth century). While the Church of St Nicholas was not decimated, its redesign was restricted by the Ottomans, subsequently it bit by bit fell into ruin. 

In his 1931 investigation, Mavrodinov additionally composes that at the time, the congregation came up short on a rooftop. He references an anecdote about a gathering of Circassians that were settled in Sapareva Banya on the request of the Ottoman experts after the Crimean War (1853–1856). As indicated by that story, the Circassians looked to pull down the congregation's rooftop. In any case, one of them tumbled to his demise inside the congregation, so they fled with dismay. The congregation was completely recreated in 1937 by a group under draftsman Rashenov. 

The Church of St Nicholas lies in the focal point of Sapareva Banya. Its design is fairly basic, with a solitary nave, a solitary apse and no narthex present. The congregation pursues the Byzantine cross-in-square plan, with abnormally short arms of equivalent size. The vault has twelve sides and is of no specific stature, however it is somewhat huge for the congregation's size. The apse is arranged on the congregation's eastern side; its shape is half circle and it includes a window. The passage is situated on the west divider. 

The congregation was developed out of lines of red blocks stuck together with white mortar. As indicated by researcher Bistra Nikolova, its size is , while another source estimates it as . In any case, it is square in appearance. In stature, it likely came to at the vault and at the cornice. 

As far as structure and beautification, Mavrodinov compares the congregation to the Church of St Pantaleon in Gorno Nerezi close Skopje, today in the Republic of Macedonia. It is likewise contrasted with the Church of St Theodore in adjacent Boboshevo. The Church of St Nicholas includes a huge number of two-ventured vaults on its outside dividers. The inside was initially totally secured with frescoes, however just pieces endure. It was enrolled as a landmark of culture of national significance in 1968, with a production in Bulgaria's paper of record, the "State Gazette", issue 77.