Tropical storm Beth 

Sea tempest Beth was a fleeting tropical twister which made a trip from Florida to Nova Scotia amidst August 1971. The second named tempest of the 1971 Atlantic tropical storm season, Beth's beginning was obstructed by a chilly domain encompassing the tempest. Be that as it may, as it proceeded on its northeastward course, it accomplished completely tropical attributes and crested as an unobtrusive Category 1 storm on the Saffir–Simpson Hurricane Scale. The twister struck Nova Scotia on August 16 preceding disseminating not long after. Beth delivered significant precipitation, and the resultant flooding dispensed extreme harm to framework and yields. 

On August 9, a low weight framework in the upper dimensions of the climate shaped off the east bank of Florida. It turned into a surface low by the following day and obtained the attributes of a tropical tornado; it is formally expressed to have turned into a tropical dejection at 1200 UTC on August 10. The misery gradually propelled northeastward inside a generally chilly condition, and thusly, it didn't escalate for a few days. The framework turned more toward the east as it moved toward the shoreline of North Carolina, at which time its structure ended up helpful for further advancement. On August 14, the wretchedness was announced a typhoon and doled out the name Beth following ongoing information from a surveillance flying machine. 

A few hundred miles off the U.S. East Coast, Beth quickened to some degree – coming to advance velocities of up to as it continued a northeastward course. Its base focal weight extended to , and correspondingly, most extreme continued breezes expanded. Accordingly, the violent wind was perceived as a Category 1 typhoon. It kept on developing as it passed east of Cape Cod, accomplishing top breezes of and a weight of . In this manner, the tropical storm debilitated marginally while nearing Nova Scotia. On August 16, it made landfall close Copper Lake before intersection Cape Breton Island. Presently, Beth was cleared up by a close-by virus front and changed into an extratropical typhoon. 

Ahead of time of Hurricane Beth, typhoon admonitions were issued for waterfront and marine regions of Nova Scotia and Newfoundland. In Halifax, transport administration was disturbed by the tempest, and in Antigonish, entrepreneurs shut their stores and filled sandbags to get ready. 

The tropical storm left broad harm afterward, particularly to harvests and framework. Halifax International Airport revealed of precipitation more than 30 hours. The overwhelming precipitation all through the nation activated extreme flooding, stranding many voyagers. The civic chairman of Dartmouth announced that the region was a "calamity", as 500 homes were purportedly immersed. Antigonish additionally experienced huge flooding; waters there moved toward the highest point of stopping meters. Affected yields in the area included oat grain, corn, and tobacco, whose immersed fields looked like tremendous lakes. 

Transport endured harshly: a few principle streets, including some portion of the Trans-Canada Highway and Nova Scotia Highway 102, in northeastern Nova Scotia got flood harm and were incidentally closed off. Also, the rising waters washed out a few scaffolds in the area and cleared away cars. Railroads were secured by water, compelling trains to suspend their task. Savoring water Dartmouth was tainted because of over the top overflow into Lake Antigonish, and a trailer park in Antigonish overwhelmed, inciting 600 occupants to empty. Generally speaking money related harm from Beth is evaluated at between $3.5 million and $5.1 million USD. One individual was in a roundabout way slaughtered by the sea tempest in a car crash prompted by overwhelming precipitation.