Battle for You 

"Battle for You" is a melody performed by American account craftsman Jason Derulo, discharged as the fourth single from his second studio collection, "Future History", on December 2, 2011. The tune was composed by Derulo, Stevie Hoang, David Paich and Jeff Porcaro, while creation was taken care of by RedOne, BeatGeek and Geo Slam. Musically, "Battle for You" is a urban-pop melody, that examples the tune "Africa" (1982) by American musical crew Toto. The verses spin around how Derulo, the hero, has "got a young lady in his life he isn't prepared to relinquish at this time". Hoang had initially recorded "Battle for You" for his third autonomous collection, "Unsigned" (2011) with his unique track including Iyaz. 

The melody's generation and Derulo's vocal execution gathered positive surveys from music pundits, in any case, some censured its absence of creativity. "Battle for You" achieved moderate graph achievement, topping at number five in Australia, and achieving the best twenty in the United Kingdom. The going with music video depicts an anecdotal connection among Derulo and his adoration intrigue. Derulo played out the tune at KDWB-FM's yearly Jingle Ball in 2011. 

"Battle for You" was composed by Jason Derulo, Stevie Hoang, David Paich and Jeff Porcaro, while generation of the tune was helmed by RedOne, BeatGeek and Geo Slam. "Battle for You" was initially recorded by Hoang, for his third free collection, "Unsigned" (2011). His form of the melody highlights British Virgin Island recording craftsman Iyaz. 

Derulo's adaptation of "Battle for You" was recorded and built by Gelly Kusuma, Slam and Teddy Sky at Serenity West Recording Studio and Jim Henson Studios in Los Angeles, California. Derulo, RedOne, Laila Khayat, Samya Khayat and Sky performed foundation vocals on the melody. The accounts were later blended by Trevor Muzzy. All instruments and writing computer programs were given by RedOne, BeatGeek and Slam. In a main story for the "Day by day Star", Derulo expressed that "Battle for You" was the primary melody he chipped away at with RedOne, saying "I'm happy it turned out so dope". On working with RedOne, he stated: "Red initially ended up hot when he delivered the collection "The Fame" with Lady Gaga. He is one of the most delightful folks I've ever met. ... RedOne was a decent, unassuming, sensible, uncommon individual". 

"Battle for You" was added to standard radio playlists in the United Kingdom on November 9, 2011. A computerized expanded play, including four remixes of the melody, was discharged in Ireland and the UK on December 2, 2011. 

"Battle for You" is a urban-pop melody with a length of four minutes and two seconds. As indicated by Meena Rupani of DesiHits, the tune discovers Derulo as the male hero singing "that he has a young lady in his life he isn't prepared to relinquish at this time". The tune contains an example of the melody "Africa" (1982) by American musical crew Toto. Lewis Corner of Digital Spy noticed that "Battle for You" highlights "breezy synths and fun mansion estimated beats". Amid a meeting with "New!" magazine, Derulo clarified the idea of "Battle for You", saying: "It's very relationship-based and the line ["fight for you"] implies so a lot, whatever you trust in you ought to go for. The tune depends on an individual encounter, I was seeing someone I placed myself in that place again where you would effectively keep the relationship together so I returned to that place." 

"Battle for You" collected positive audits from music pundits for its appealing creation and Derulo's vocal execution. David Griffiths of 4Music considered it an "appealing little tune" that "is destined to be latched onto your subconscious mind for the remainder of the day". Shawn Kitchener of Entertainment Wise portrayed the melody as "the sort of sweet-as-treat R&B grain" that could have been highlighted on the "Secondary School Musical" soundtrack. Meena Rupani of DesiHits noticed that the melody's melodious subject is like "It Girl", and that Derulo's "vocals are sufficient to put any young lady into a stupor". Nonetheless, "Battle for You" additionally gotten troublesome surveys from commentators in light of its absence of creativity. Lewis Corner of Digital Spy gave the melody a three out of five star rating, calling Derulo "incredibly lethargic" for inspecting "Africa". Caroline Sullivan of "The Guardian" depicted the tune as "sluggish", while composing that the example gives it "a touch of skip". In spite of the fact that Jess Holton of "The Music Network" depicted "Battle for You" as a "contacting ditty", she included that examining "Africa" does not do the last "any type of equity". In a collection audit of "Future History", Michael Cragg of BBC Music noticed that the tunes "spin around the delights of being seeing someone the agony of not being in one", anyway disliked the melodious substance and test in "Battle for You", calling it "maybe the most exceedingly bad guilty party" on the collection. 

After the arrival of "Future History", "Battle for You" appeared and crested on the US "Announcement" Hot 100 at number 83 on the issue dated October 15, 2011, and on the UK Singles Chart at number 117 on October 22, 2011. Upon its discharge as a solitary in the last nation, "Battle for You" figured out how to crest at number 15 on the UK Singles Chart, and at number four on the UK R&B Singles Chart. In Ireland, the melody appeared at number 31 on December 1, 2011, and topped at number 28 the next week. On the Danish Singles Chart, "Battle for You" appeared and topped at number 27 on January 20, 2012. In Australia, the melody appeared at number 27 on the ARIA Singles Chart on February 20, 2012. "Battle for You" topped at number five in its third week, and spent an aggregate of seven successive weeks inside the main ten. It was in the long run ensured twofold platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association (ARIA), meaning shipments of 140,000 duplicates. 

The video for "Battle for You" debuted online on November 25, 2011. It starts with Derulo strolling on a scaffold in a city around evening time, before the video slices to scenes of Derulo and his affection enthusiasm embracing and drinking liquor, too appearing remaining solitary on a top of a structure in Manhattan. Another scene discovers Derulo and his affection enthusiasm sharing a shower. The video keeps on demonstrating the pair fraternizing, incorporating eating in eateries, riding the metro, and moving on the tram stage. David Greenwald of MTV Buzzworthy considered it Derulo's "steamiest" video to date. 

On December 3, 2011, Derulo performed "Battle for You" at radio station KDWB-FM's yearly Jingle Ball, which occurred at the Target Center in Minneapolis, Minnesota. The tune was a piece of a set rundown, which notwithstanding "Whatcha Say", "In My Head", "Ridin' Solo", "Don't Wanna Go Home" and "It Girl". As per Jon Bream of the "Star Tribune", Derulo "turned it out with sweet vocals and smooth moving". On May 21, 2012, Taga Paa played out a front of "Battle for You" on "The Voice Australia". Rosemarie Lentini of "The Daily Telegraph" considered it a "moving interpretation", while Seanna Cronin of "The Gympie Times" noticed that Paa's execution "had a couple of pitch issues". 

Credits adjusted from the liner notes for "Future History". 

!scope="col" colspan="3"| Streaming