Raptor (Cedar Point) 

Raptor is a steel transformed exciting ride structured by Bolliger and Mabillard at Cedar Point in Sandusky, Ohio, United States. At the point when worked in 1994, it broke numerous records and held numerous firsts when it opened. Rather than having a short format intended to fit into a minimized region like , Raptor was planned with a bigger, 3,790-foot (1,160â m) design, making it the tallest, quickest and longest modified crazy ride on the planet when it opened. It highlights six reversals, including a cobra roll, a first for altered exciting rides. At its opening, it was the biggest interest in Cedar Point history. The ride is themed as a flying creature of prey. 

On August 19, 1993, Cedar Fair Entertainment Company recorded a trademark for the name Raptor. Raptor was then declared on September 1, 1993 amid a question and answer session. As to structure of the fascination, Cedar Point the executives, stated: "Raptor will be the most energizing and aspiring task everâ ... a venture that will challenge the limits of creative ability and change the Sandusky, Ohio entertainment mecca/resort like nothing before it." 

Development began after the 1993 season with the site clearing of the Mill Race log flume water ride. The Midway Carousel and Calypso were migrated in October to different territories of the recreation center to prepare for Raptor. Footers likewise started to be poured that month. The lift slope was finished off in December with track development proceeding through January 1994. The main trains were tried around two months after the fact in March. Last arrangements were made in March with the passageway square being fabricated and of halfway supplanted. Media day was hung on May 6 preceding the ride opened to the open the following day out of the blue. The ride was initially painted with dull green backings, splendid green track and unpainted rails. It was repainted for the 2002 season and the rails were painted dull green, coordinating the backings. It was repainted again before the beginning of the 2016 season. 

Raptor is situated on three sections of land (1.2 ha) at the front of the recreation center close Blue Streak. The ride goes over the pathway to Blue Streak at that point goes by the Cadillac Cars and Cedar Downs Racing Derby. 

The ride starts with a left-hand turn out of the station to the lift slope that rises . Riders are pulled up by a 9,000â lbf (40Â kN) chain lift. At the top, the train plunges somewhat into the pre-drop before turning 90 degrees to one side as it drops down the main slope. From the base the train quickly enters a vertical circle. The train at that point enters a zero-g roll pursued by the cobra move which transforms riders twice. The cobra roll was a first for transformed exciting rides. After the cobra roll, the train moves through an upward winding and enters the mid-course brake run. Next, the train plunges down to the privilege changing into a concise straight area of track. Riders at that point enter the first of two corkscrews which turns the train 360 degrees to one side. The track fixes quickly again before swinging to one side and entering a short plunge before bringing riders into the second corkscrew. The ride completes with a 1.5 insurgency level helix where riders experience solid positive G-powers before making one final left transform into the last brake run. One cycle of the ride endures around 2 minutes and 16 seconds. 

The steel track is around long and the tallness of the lift is roughly . The primary drop is . At the point when the napkin originally opened, it was painted with dim green backings, splendid green track and unpainted rails. 1,500 gallons of paint were utilized to initially paint it. Raptor was repainted for the 2002 season and the rails were painted dull green, coordinating the backings. The vast majority of the 117 segments of track were produced by Clermont Steel Fabricators in Batavia, Ohio. The exciting ride was repainted again for the 2016 season with its unique hues. 

Raptor works with three steel and fiberglass trains. Each train has eight vehicles that have four seats in a solitary line for an aggregate of 32 riders in Ski lift like trains. Riders are verified by an over the shoulder limitation with a locking belt. The trains were fabricated in Switzerland at Bolliger and Mabillard's central station. 

Raptor is antagonistically influenced by ominous climate conditions as both a high height and high speed ride. "Downpour, high breezes, or potentially lightning" may result in the end of the ride contingent upon the seriousness. It shut in high breezes and any sort of precipitation. 

There is no base age prerequisite, however travelers must meet the miniumum tallness necessity of to ride. A few people over a specific weight/midsection estimate are not allowed to ride if the seat and lap bar saddle can't suit them. Travelers on Raptor may not bring any free articles onto the train and are required to wear shirts and footwear. Earphones must be expelled before boarding. 

Travelers are exhorted that they should not ride Raptor on the off chance that they have "a past filled with late medical procedure, heart inconvenience/hypertension, neck inconvenience, back inconvenience, or whatever other condition that might be disturbed by riding, or who are pregnant". 

On July 6, 2009, a visitor griped of inclination black out after the ride. Raptor was quickly closed down as the visitor was transported to a nearby medical clinic. The ride stayed shut for the rest of the day, reviving the following evening after an intensive assessment was finished. The visitor was later discharged from the emergency clinic. 

On June 21, 2015, a 37-year-elderly person's leg was sliced by the ride's stacking stage entryways. He was taken to a nearby emergency clinic where his injury was sutured. 

On August 13, 2015, a 45-year-elderly person was struck by a moving train in the wake of entering the ride's confined region to recover a phone he lost while riding. He was articulated dead on scene not long after paramedics' landing. The ride was promptly shut for assessment and revived the following day. 

Raptor is one of the primary altered exciting rides worked on the planet is as yet considered a top steel crazy ride upheld by the Golden Ticket Award rankings.