Mycena arcangeliana 

Mycena arcangeliana (generally known as the heavenly attendant's hat or the late-season hood) is a types of Mycenaceae growth. It has been known by various logical names, and its scientific classification is still to some degree debated. It delivers little mushrooms with tops differing in shading from whitish to a darker dim dark colored, and stems of an olive-grayish that blur with age. The mushrooms can be confused with the comparable "Mycena flavescens". They have a gentle taste, yet a solid smell of iodoform; they are not palatable. The species develops on dead wood in fall months, and can be found all through Europe. 

"Mycena arcangeliana" was first portrayed by Giacomo Bresadola in 1904; the species was recorded alongside 41 others found in Pisa, in an article by Egidio Barsali distributed in the "Bollettino Della Societa Botanica Italiana" ("Bulletin of the Botanical Society of Italy"). Creators Roger Phillips and Paul Sterry both portray the name "Mycena oortiana" as synonymous; "M.â oortiana" was a name given by Frederich Hora in 1960 dependent on Robert Kăźhner's 1938 name for the assortment "Mycena arcangeliana" var. "oortiana", an invalid name. Phillips had before considered "M. arcangeliana" var. "oortiana" to be an equivalent word of "M.â oortiana", and MycoBank records it as an equivalent word of Lucien Quăšlet's "Mycena olivascens". Notwithstanding, Index Fungorum records both "M. olivascens" and Kăźhner's "Mycena vitilis" var. "olivascens" as equivalent words of "M.â arcangeliana". The particular sobriquet "arcangeliana" might be to pay tribute to Giovanni Arcangeli, who gathered the species in the Orto botanico di Pisa. "M.â arcangeliana" is normally known as the holy messenger's hood, or the late-season cap. 

Inside the family "Mycena", it is found in the segment "Filipedes", because of the cheilocystidia secured with uniformly dispersed, short barrel shaped excrescences, and its size and event on wood. It tends to be isolated from different individuals from the segment by virtue of a top with yellowish to olive shades, gills with pinkish insights and stems with ambiguously violet colouration. 

"Mycena arcangeliana" mushrooms have tops of between in distance across which are conelike fit as a fiddle in more youthful mushrooms, getting to be chime formed with a wide umbo in more established examples. The most established mushrooms have tops which are totally level. The colouration fluctuates from a whitish to a darker dim darker, at times with tints of olive or yellow, and it has wrinkles on the normally translucent surface. Be that as it may, it is hygrophanous, and dries to an a lot paler shading. The barrel shaped stem measures between long, by in width. In youthful mushrooms, it is an olive-grayish shading, tinted with lilac, however it blurs as the mushroom ages. The highest point of the stem is a whitish shading, while the base is canvassed in white hairs. It is smooth and plush in surface, and there is no ring. The jam-packed gills are adnexed, that is, associated with the stem by just piece of their profundity, and are white in shading, turning pinkish as the mushroom ages. The gill edges are to some degree toothed. The substance has a gentle taste, yet a solid smell of iodoform. In the top, it is white, while in the stem, it is dark. The mushrooms are not palatable. 

"Mycena arcangeliana" mushrooms leave a whitish spore print, while the spores are molded like apple seeds and amyloid, implying that they recolor a dull shading in Melzer's reagent or Lugol's answer. The basidia are four-spored. They measure from somewhere in the range of 7 and 8 micrometresâ (âľm) by 4.5 and 5â âľm. There are an extensive number of hyaline cheilocystidia (cystidia on the edge of the gills) which are club-formed or applaud. They have flimsy cell dividers, and are canvassed in grain-like moles. The pleurocystidia (the cystidia on the essence of the gill) are comparative in appearance. The pileipellis is comprised of mole secured hyphae estimating somewhere in the range of 2 and 4.5â âľm wide and up to 30â âľm long. The peripheral layer of the stem is made up hyphae with short, round and hollow hairs. The hyphae have brace associations. 

"Mycena arcangeliana" is to some degree like the less basic "Mycena flavescens", a species found in both hardwood and softwood woods on the floor among leaf or needle litter or field. "M. flavescens" normally has a more white top and a smell reminiscent of radish. "M. peyerimhoffi", known from Algeria, has a comparable top shading to "M. arcangeliana", yet has a yellow stem. "M. limonia", known from the Netherlands, has a lemon-yellow top and stem and more gills. Another species comparative in appearance is "M. metata", which has a sweet taste. 

"Mycena arcangeliana" develops on dead deciduous wood, favoring beech and fiery remains, where it develops in "little troops". It has additionally been recorded less oftentimes on conifers, bracken and Japanese knotweed. There have been reports from prairie, however these are likely a misidentification of "M. flavescens". It is inconsistently to normally found in pre-fall to harvest time a long time in the British Isles, however it is all the more ordinarily experienced in the south. Its dispersion is genuinely boundless somewhere else in Europe, however it is less normal. It has been recorded as powerless on the Red List of Threatened Fungi in Norway. ""Mycena oortiana"", which was seldom found in mycological writing, was portrayed as an overwhelmingly west-European animal groups; in any case, "M. arcangeliana" has likewise been recorded in Scandinavia, Greenland, and Italy, from where it was first depicted.