Marasmius sasicola 

Marasmius sasicola is a types of Marasmiaceae parasite known from Kanagawa Prefecture, Japan. First gathered in 2000, it was portrayed in 2002 by Haruki Takahashi. The species creates little mushrooms with white tops and extremely short, exceptionally dainty dark stems. Not at all like in other, comparable species, the stems enter the plant matter on which the mushroom develops. The six to eight white gills are spread out around the top, and every one of them achieve the stem. The tissue has no taste or scent. Found in June, the species develops on dead "Sasa" leaves, from which it takes its particular appellation. 

"Marasmius sasicola" was first portrayed by Haruki Takahashi (2002) in an article in "Mycoscience", in light of examples gathered from Ikuta Ryokuchi Park, Kawasaki, Kanagawa Prefecture, Japan in 2000 and 2001. The particular name "sasicola" alludes to the reality the species develops upon the leaves of "Sasa" species. The Japanese basic name for the species is "Sasa-no-houraitake". Inside the family "Mycena", it presumably has a place with the area "Marasmius", and the subsection "Penicillati", because of characters of the stem, gills and pileipellis (the external most layer of the top). 

"Marasmius sasicola" produces mushrooms that have curved tops from in measurement highlighting folds or striations. The tops don't grow or level with age, and are dry and dull. The top surface is canvassed in minor grains which evaporate as the mushrooms age. The tops of youthful mushrooms are hued light darker, however paler at the top edge; as they develop, the tops become paler, moving toward white when completely developed. The slender, smooth stem measures between long by thick. It associates with the focal point of the top, and is a dim darker to dark shading. Mycelial lines can't be seen at the base of the stem, which grapples itself into the substrate. The white gills can be adnexed (joining to the stem by just piece of their profundity) to adnate (connecting by their full profundity). They are not in the slightest degree swarmed, with somewhere in the range of 6 and 8 separate gills, all of which achieve the stem. Every gill is up to wide, however it is more slender at the edge. The mushrooms have a flimsy layer of whitish tissue up to thick. The intense however adaptable tissue comes up short on any smell or taste. 

"Marasmius sasicola" produces boring, ellipsoid basidiospores of somewhere in the range of 8 and 10 by 4 to 6â micrometres (Îźm). The spores have no ornamentation, are not amyloid and have slender cell dividers. In his examinations, Takahashi did not watch any basidia, however he described the club-molded basidioles (juvenile basidia) which estimated from 18 to 26 by 6 to 10â îźm. The firmly stuffed cheilocystidia (cystidia on the edge of the gill) structure a sterile edge to the gill, and there are no pleurocystidia (cystidia on the essence of the gill). The pileipellis, the top layer of the top, frames a hymeniderm, a cell structure reminiscent of the hymenium on the gills. This is comprised of club-molded cells estimating somewhere in the range of 2 and 8 by 7 to 10â îźm, with rosy dark colored, smooth cell dividers up to 1â îźm thick. The stipitipellis, the peripheral layer of the stem, is comprised of tube shaped hyphae estimating from 3 to 6â îźm in width, which run parallel to each other. They have featureless dark colored cell dividers measuring up to 1â îźm thick, and the septa (the dividers isolating individual cells) have clasp associations. 

The tissue in the top is comprised of unpredictably orchestrated barrel shaped hyphae from 5 to 15â îźm wide. They recolor a dull ruddy dark colored in Melzer's reagent or Lugol's answer. The substance in the stem is comprised of hyphae which rundown the stem and measure 4 to 11â îźm in thickness. The smooth cell dividers are vapid, yet again recolor a dull ruddy darker in Melzer's reagent or Lugol's answer. The septa have clasp associations. 

"Marasmius subconiatus", known from Sri Lanka and Indonesia, is fairly like "M.â sasicola". It tends to be separated as its stem does not enter the substrate, and the gills vary. In "M.â subconiatus", the gills are orange, and game cheilocystidia which are light yellow. 

"Marasmius sasicola" is known from the swamp timberlands of Kanagawa Prefecture, Japan, and can be found in June. Mushrooms develop in extensive numbers near one another, and develop from dead leaves of "Sasa" (grass bamboo) which have fallen.