Darker Betty (Fringe) 

"Darker Betty" is the twentieth scene of the second period of the American sci-fi show TV arrangement "Periphery", and is the just a solitary one of the arrangement executed as a melodic. The scene was composed by co-showrunners Jeff Pinkner and J. H. Wyman, and counseling maker Akiva Goldsman. It was coordinated by movie producer Seith Mann. As the scene starts with Peter's proceeded with vanishing, Walter reassures himself by smoking a strain of cannabis called "Dark colored Betty." Most of the scene is then told from his medication confounded viewpoint, in which Olivia is a 1940s noir criminologist and Peter is a conman who fled with Walter's glass heart. 

The scene initially circulated in the United States on April 29, 2010 on the Fox Broadcasting Company and was seen by 5.551 million watchers in the United States. The scene was a piece of the system's "Fox Rocks" battle, in which melodic components were consolidated into different shows in their lineup for seven days, an idea that was panned by pundits before the scene circulated. By and by, "Darker Betty" accumulated for the most part ideal audits, with many noticing the melodic component as a solid point. Different cast individuals likewise expressed that they delighted in the melodic part of the scene. It was positioned the fourth best scene of the whole arrangement by "Excitement Weekly". 

The scene starts with Dr. Walter Bishop (John Noble) smoking his own strain of pot called "Dark colored Betty" while Olivia Dunham (Anna Torv) endeavors to discover his child, Peter (Joshua Jackson), who vanished toward the finish of the past scene in the wake of taking in Walter stole him from a parallel universe. Since Dunham's sister Rachel (Ari Graynor) is inaccessible, she brings her niece Ella (Lily Pilblad) to the lab for Walter and Astrid Farnsworth (Jasika Nicole) to care for. To sit back, Walter discloses to Ella an analyst noir story in which Olivia is a private examiner. 

In the story, Rachel approaches Olivia to discover her beau, Peter, who has disappeared. Amid the examination, Detective Phillip Broyles (Lance Reddick) drives her to Massive Dynamic, where the CEO Nina Sharp (Blair Brown) advises her that Peter is a conman and mechanical covert operative. Afterward, Rachel is discovered killed, with her heart taken. Olivia finds a check marked by Walter Bishop, who in the story, is a creator that has made "everything that is magnificent on the planet" so as to profit mankind (embraces, rainbows, bubblegum, singing bodies). Addressing Walter, Olivia discovers that Peter worked with Walter, who treated him like a child. At some point, Walter made a glass heart yet Peter later stole it. Were the heart not to be discovered, Walter and his thoughts would pass on. To help discover Peter, Olivia calls her aide, "Esther Figglesworth" (Farnsworth). 

Afterward, Olivia pursues Nina Sharp, just to wind up seized by a "watcher" (the Observer, played by Michael Cerveris) working for Sharp. The watcher endeavors to execute Olivia by putting her in a wooden box and sending it out to ocean. Luckily, Olivia is protected by Peter. In the wake of taking her to his refuge, he uncovers that the glass heart was his essentially of having been brought into the world with it, and that in the wake of working with Walter, Peter adored him enough to give it to him. Be that as it may, he took it back in the wake of learning a horrible mystery behind his creations: they were stolen from youngsters' fantasies and supplanted with bad dreams. Afterward, the house is enduring an onslaught by a multitude of watchers. Olivia wards them off, however not before they figure out how to take Peter's heart with them. Subsequent to putting batteries in his heart hole to go about as a transitory measure, Olivia finds that Walter set up the assault. In the encounter, Walter apologizes for his wrongdoings and guarantees to change. Be that as it may, Peter does not excuse Walter and abandons him, finishing the story. 

Ella is disillusioned by the closure, as that isn't the manner by which she trusts stories should end, so she proposes an other consummation: when Walter says he can change, Peter trusts him and parts the glass heart in two, and together they "lived joyfully ever after." At the scene's end, Olivia returns, having discovered no leads on Peter's area. Farnsworth returns Walter to his home, where the Observer watches from a separation and notes Peter's vanishing. 

The scene was initially called "Suggestion", yet was later changed to "Darker Betty" as a source of perspective to Walter's cannabis propensity. It was composed by official makers Jeff Pinkner and J. H. Wyman alongside counseling maker Akiva Goldsman. Seith Mann filled in as the chief, his solitary directional credit for the arrangement. For Sweeps Week, the Fox organize declared the "Fox Rocks" crusade, in which different shows inside their lineup were urged to create melodic scenes in a similar vein as the sophomore show "Merriment". Alongside "Periphery", "Family Guy", "Bones", "The Simpsons", and a couple of other Fox arrangement took up the melodic subject. The scene was at that point being developed before Fox's declaration. Jeff Pinkner expressed that the music was not in the first arrangement for the scene, yet was added to fit into Fox's breadths stunt. As the scene happened after the huge uncover of Peter's actual character ("The Man from the Other Side"), the journalists realized they needed "Dark colored Betty" to investigate the outcome from Walter's harmed mind. Fox did not request an out and out melodic, however mentioned that some music be coordinated into the scene in any shape or structure. Pinkner expounded: 

"We concocted an account gadget to truly investigate Walter's emotions. We had to a great extent every one of the components of the scene set up and Fox called and stated, 'Hello, how might you all vibe about in the event that we requested that you have some melodic component in the show? Anything, as simply highlight a melody playing.' They didn't request that we do "Joy". What's more, we immediately, before we got off the telephone, stated, 'Well, this is what we're supposing for the scene and here's a thought how that could function for us.' We transformed their solicitation into what felt like a positive for us and truly developed and kind of blew the scene out considerably further toward the path we were at that point taking it". 

The scene starts with Walter smoking his own strain of cannabis while tuning in to "Indirect" by the band Yes. The scene was initially evacuated out of concern it would air on system TV, however was later reinserted in light of the fact that "the story itself had such a significant number of various kinds playing. We had a noir component. We had a melodic component. what's more, it just truly played more entertaining originating from an adjusted province of Walter", as indicated by co-maker Tanya Swerling. Jeff Pinkner included "We set out to complete a scene that investigated Walter's perspective — he's managing some irritating news. When we understood that the manner in which Walter would manage such news is endeavor to anesthetize himself with bountiful measures of maryjane, well, singing and moving turned into a characteristic result." Music boss Charles Scott IV and J.R. Wyman are enormous Yes fans, and thus picked the tune that showed up in the opening scene. As the scene was finished with a 1940s tasteful, each division needed to act appropriately. Torv's regularly straight hair was set into a twist haircut elegant for the timeframe, and lighting changes were made to mirror the period too. New furniture was gotten for different sets, for example, Walter's lab and Nina's office at Massive Dynamic, which was then expelled in anticipation of the next week. The closure was a test for the makers, as it should finish with Ella's rendition of the story end Walter as yet feeling resentful about Peter's nonattendance, however they felt this finished making watchers feel discouraged. They discussed approaches to make it a more joyful tone, so Wyman added the Observer scene to change the sentiment of the scene, and plan watchers for one week from now. 

As visitor performing artist Leonard Nimoy, who plays William Bell, was inaccessible to shoot the short discussion with Blair Brown's Nina Sharp, the makers realized they needed to accomplish something somewhat more imaginative for the scene. They conversed with sketch artist Frank Miller and enlisted an enhancements school to do all the demonstrating, which they achieved dependent on photographs of Nimoy, in light of the fact that the performer couldn't come in to have his head checked; he did some voicework in any case. The completed scene incorporated an enlivened variant of Nimoy's head, appeared through a similar window as the one utilized in "Dwindle". 

Pinkner thought the additional melodic component improved the scene, since it gave bits of knowledge into every one of the characters' minds. As indicated by Wyman and Pinkner, the "scene should be a fantastical scene in any case, thus the music bolsters the narrating". Wyman proceeded in an alternate meeting with the "Los Angeles Times" that "Noirs generally are profound quality stories, and that is somewhat what we're doing. We felt that that was an incredible method to get over Walter's mind outline and where his head is at the present moment, with his child missing". Other cast individuals likewise lauded the additional music. John Noble expressed "It truly extended and blew the scene out significantly further toward the path we were at that point taking. We get [Walter's] broke interpretation of the world and his condition since Peter has left. The music truly bolsters the narrating". He included, "It resembles a mind-excursion of Walter's. It is Walter endeavoring to think about the way that his child is no more". Jasika Nicole proceeded: "I have a melodic performance center foundation, so I've been sitting tight for some minute in some domain of where I am in TV and film for this to occur and, you know, obviously, when "Happiness" went ahead the air I resembled, 'Extraordinary, that was my opportunity,' and I'm in this show, which I cherish this show, however I'm never going to sing and move in this show. What's more, I did! It's so amazing!" Swerling called it "the longest and potentially most troublesome scene of the period" to make. 

Similarly as with other "Periphery" scenes, Fox discharged a science exercise plan for evaluation younger students concentrating on the science found in "Darker Betty", with the goal of having "understudies find out about fingerprints and how they can be gathered and utilized as proof to recognize a person." 

The co-music manager, Billy Gottlieb, considered the scene a "little scaled down element film as in we had a great deal of camera exhibitions with the music." In request to get the best exhibitions out of the cast and have the capacity to shoot the scenes in different diverse ways, the makers had the on-screen characters go into a music studio in Vancouver and record their individual melodic numbers. As per Gottlieb, the performers were extremely apprehensive about singing in the scene, regardless of their parts being around an insignificant 40 seconds. Performing artist Joshua Jackson, who plays Peter Bishop, was resolved that he not sing in the scene, notwithstanding the reality he oftentimes sings on set, making him be one of only a handful couple of cast individuals with no melodic part. As the first content contained no melodic number for Jasika Nicole, she messaged Jeff Pinkner explicitly requesting that he let her sing, which he at that point endorsed. A few faultfinders noticed their unexpected that Tony Award-winning performing artist Michael Cerveris did not sing in the scene. The makers were at first going to make them sing Django Reinhardt's "Blue Moon", yet altered their opinions since they figured it is smarter to keep the Observer out of the melodic part of the scene. Regardless of the pre-accounts, the sound utilized in the scene was taken from the performers really singing on set. Tanya Swerling trusted the accounts were not a squandered exertion notwithstanding, as it helped make the on-screen characters increasingly agreeable about singing on set. Toward the finish of shooting, Gottlieb trusted "everyone was incredible... they could bounce in front of an audience and do Broadway and it wouldn't be an issue for any of them". He and other group individuals called Jasika Nicole "presumably the most cultivated" melodic individual of the cast. As one of the scene scholars, Akiva Goldsman picked the Stevie Wonder melody "For Once in My Life". 

On making the scene's score, Chris Tilton refered to "Chinatown" as a major impact, and remarked "the thought was to have this noir feel yet at the same time not be absolutely far from "Periphery"". 

The scene included excerpted music from the accompanying tracks: 

"Darker Betty" was viewed by 5.551 million watchers in the United States, with a 3.4 offer out 5 among all families and a 2.0/6 offer of the gathering of people matured 18–49. The scene fell five percent from the earlier week. 

The scene debuted to commonly positive surveys. Albeit at first flinching over the melodic reason, Ramsey Isler of IGN called the scene "as a matter of fact fun" since it "gave us a roundabout window to see how Walter feels about himself". In an audit of the DVD, another pundit from IGN later considered it the "most noticeably bad by and large scene" of the period in any case, making the inquiry "Melodic numbers and Olivia Dunham: who figured this would be a smart thought?" Ken Tucker of "Amusement Weekly" was likewise at first disturbed subsequent to hearing Fox's melodic plans, and therefore gave "Periphery a great deal of credit for pulling off this hour so shrewdly" Jennifer Walker from "television Fanatic" thought the scene was "unusual" to watch; it "held our enthusiasm for the whole an hour, yet truly neglected to present any new data about Peter and the obscure man that has crossed into our measurement". "MTV's" John Wigler cherished the "noir" component, and thought "every single taking part "Periphery" cast part shown extraordinary melodic capacity. Generally speaking, it was an exceptionally strong exertion on everybody's part". Jane Boursaw of "television Squad" cherished the scenes among Walter and Ella, and thought "it was out and out splendid to make a story inside a story". While he lauded the scene's creation and the singing capacities of the cast, Kurt Anthony Krug of "Mania.com" composed a negative survey: "All things considered, what should be a fun filler scene before the topic of where Peter went toward the finish of the last scene when he discovered he was the Peter from a substitute reality – one of the defining moments in the show’s folklore – bombed". Sarah Stegall of SFScope delighted in it, stating "There was simply enough music, and simply enough move, to season this story without overburdening it". She lauded the risktaking it took to make the scene "restless and unusual, throwing away the solid shows of TV storytelling...Not just was it engaging, yet it pushed the storyline ahead on some critical enthusiastic fronts, as the characters manage Peter's vanishing in manners that ensure them, however uncover too". 

Andrew Hanson from the "Los Angeles Times" additionally was inspired with the cast's singing capacities, and adulated the scholars' hazard taking: "that just demonstrates how all around considered, innovative, and out and out fun tonight’s “Fringe” truly was. Many individuals would have pegged a 1940s film noir melodic scene as a major hazard, however the greater the hazard, the greater the compensation out". Rhee Dee of "Pinkraygun.com" remarked "After the disclosure in the last scene, and Peter fleeing, this scene was an extraordinary method to express Walter’s distress and blame about this entire circumstance without really watching Walter talk about how dismal and blameworthy he feels about everything. Walter’s story fills in as a ground-breaking similitude for how he really feels". Tim Grierson of "New York Magazine" thought the scene ended up being essentially fair since "its noir components weren’t fused in a truly fascinating manner, and with respect to the melodic numbers, they would in general be disposable bits, put something aside for “fictional” Dunham warbling “For Once in My Life” to the apparently biting the dust “fictional” Peter close to the episode’s end". Grierson proceeded with that "If a show is going to totally discard its typical rulebook for a fun onetime-just scene, it would be extraordinary if the authors could concoct a story as daring as their reason. Be that as it may, beside some Chinatown references, extravagant strings, and somewhat astute reflecting of the show’s folklore — Massive Dynamic is planning something sinister in this story-land world too — 'Darker Betty' wasn’t all that charming in light of the fact that it didn’t work superbly of catching what by and large makes Fringe agreeable". 

Noel Murray of "The A.V. Club" evaluated the scene an "A-", while "TV Without Pity" gave it a "C+". Jeff Jensen of "Excitement Weekly" named it the fourth best scene of the arrangement, clarifying "The late season songbird that authoritatively propelled a convention for comparative tricks, the melodic film noir tribute 'Darker Betty'... was an odd pearl that communicated all of "Fringe"s center topics — recovery, association, rehumanization — and typified the key connections (the moderate moving Walter-Peter compromise; Peter and Olivia's deliberately tended soul-profound sentiment) more piercingly than most on-point scenes of "Periphery", and it left fans needing the show to continue pushing the advancement. It would never do it enough." In a comparable rundown, Den of Geek named it the ninth best scene of the arrangement, clarifying that "it shouldn’t work, but then it does, on the grounds that albeit in fact nothing occurs, the scene indicates us exactly how profound Walter has sunk into an allegorical pit of misery and blame, making himself the reprobate in his own story and losing faith in regards to consistently being excused. It likewise offers the gathering of people a reviving reprieve from a portion of the abnormal state apprehension of the finish of the period, permitting Peter and Olivia to showcase a legitimately sentimental storyline while their characters in the ‘real’ world have been destroyed. Likewise, there are singing cadavers in it. Just on "Periphery"." 

"Dark colored Betty," alongside Music Editor Paul Apelgren, was named for Best Sound Editing: TV Short Form Music in a Musical by the Motion Picture Sound Editors for the 2011 Golden Reel Awards. "The Box", a season three "Periphery" scene, was additionally assigned for Best Sound Editing: TV Short Form Music. "Dark colored Betty" lost to a scene of "Happiness".