Lauren Zizes 

Lauren Zizes is a common anecdotal character from the Fox melodic parody show arrangement, "Joy". The character is depicted by performing artist Ashley Fink, and has showed up in "Merriment" since the season one scene "Wheels", first communicate on November 11, 2009. Lauren was created by "Happiness" makers Ryan Murphy, Brad Falchuk, and Ian Brennan. She is an individual from New Directions, the joy club at the anecdotal William McKinley High School in Lima, Ohio, where the show is set. Her storylines have seen her interface with different individuals from the merriment club and structure an association with Noah Puckerman (Mark Salling). Lauren is additionally the leader of the AV club, and an individual from the school's wrestling group. She joins the joy club in the show's second season, placing her in close contact with a portion of the shows principle characters. 

Following the character's altogether extended job in the second season, Fink's depiction has gotten transcendently positive audits. Rosie O'Donnell condemned the character, saying that Fink was ugly and in this manner a terrible portrayal of hefty individuals, yet later apologized for these comments. Lauren made her performance melodic introduction in the second season, playing out The Waitresses' "I Know What Boys Like" in the scene "Rebound". The melody was generally welcomed by commentators, and was discharged as a solitary, accessible for download; it was thusly included on the EP discharged in September 2011 through the Target chain, "Happiness: The Music, Dance Party". In spite of the fact that Lauren additionally shows up in troupe melodic exhibitions, Fink isn't credited as a vocalist on the arrangement's soundtrack collections. Lauren's job was diminished in the start of the third season, and she made a last, non-talking appearance in the third scene, "Asian F". After this, it was affirmed she would show up by and by in Glee and doing as such in the fourth season's scene "Sadie Hawkins", which debuted on 24 January 2013. After this, she showed up in flashbacks before seeming one last time in the arrangement finale, "Dreams Come True", amid the execution of OneRepublic's "I Lived" by the merriment club's graduated class. 

All through the main period of "Happiness", Lauren shows up. She is an individual from the McKinley High wrestling group, just as leader of the AV club. She initially shows up in the scene "Wheels", where she fruitlessly goes for a spot on the cheerleading group. She returns in "Damnation O", while cheerleading mentor Sue Sylvester amasses a gathering of disagreeable, forlorn understudies, whom she names the "Old Maid's Club". Lauren later enables happiness to club co-commander Rachel Berry (Lea Michele) to fix shrouded receivers in the choir space to demonstrate that the remainder of the joy club are not pulling their weight in practices. She is later observed as the pioneer of a gathering of goths who venerate "Dusk" character Edward Cullen. 

Lauren's job turns out to be progressively noticeable in the second season. Joy club part Puck (Mark Salling) requests that her join New Directions so they will have enough individuals to fit the bill for a show choir rivalry. Lauren acknowledges, relying on the prerequisite that she gets seven minutes in paradise with him, however it is later uncovered that she ended up exhausted with Puck's kissing style following three minutes. In the Valentine's Day-themed scene "Senseless Love Song", Puck uncovers that he has begun to look all starry eyed at Lauren, and serenades her with Queen's "Fat Bottomed Girls". She discovers his tune decision annoying and stands him up on a pre-Valentine's date, however in the long run consents to go through Valentine's Day with him as companions. Lauren makes her performance debut in the accompanying scene, where she plays out a version of "I Know What Boys Like." Puck encourages her, by encouraging her to picture different individuals in their clothing, which she does in her hesitant turned-certain execution. In the scene, "Attractive", Lauren enrolls Puck to make a sex tape with her, as she trusts the exposure will make her a star, however they surrender the thought when they learn it would establish tyke sex entertainment, as both are underage. 

In "Brought into the world This Way", Lauren uncovers to Puck that she'd been a tyke belle of the ball, "Miss Tiara Toddler", before she put on weight and ended up ineligible; Puck reveals to her he will run a crusade for her to progress toward becoming prom ruler, and be her lord. Whenever Quinn, who is prom ruler leader, sees Lauren setting up blurbs for her very own office, she goes up against Lauren, and the following experience is warmed. Lauren chooses to uncover soil on Quinn as a crusade strategy, and helped by Puck, finds that Quinn used to be overweight and disagreeable before thinning down and exchanging to McKinley; Lauren then mortars the school with photos of the old Quinn, mortifying her. Be that as it may, the strategy reverse discharges, making Quinn progressively prominent, and harming Lauren's nomination. Lauren apologizes to Quinn, Quinn says she regards Lauren, and the two achieve a comprehension. Neither Lauren nor Puck win the race for prom ruler and lord, yet they remain a couple; they fly with the remainder of New Directions to the nationals rivalry in New York City, where the merriment club comes in twelfth out of fifty groups. This annihilation drives Lauren to stop the happiness club toward the start of the third season and part ways with Puck. 

Lauren is depicted by on-screen character Ashley Fink. She showed up all through the main season, and turned into an individual from the McKinley High merriment club in the scene "specialized curriculum". After accepting the content in which Lauren joins the club, Fink at first responded with doubt. She remarked, "I didn't exactly trust it at first, I thought I was getting "Punk'd"." She said that being thrown in "Joy" makes her vibe like "the most fortunate young lady on the planet". Fink's most loved component of "Joy" is the way arrangement maker Ryan Murphy figures out how to take the dark horses and make them sparkle. She stated, "throughout everyday life, there's so much assorted variety, and it's not really spoken to on TV. I think "Joy" is one of only a handful couple of demonstrates that really shows the decent variety and it’s just so persuasive." When gotten some information about her throwing procedure, Fink stated: 

Fink does not realize to what extent her character will be highlighted on "Joy". At the point when gotten some information about what she loves about her character, Fink stated: "I think what I adore about Lauren is she's so solid thus sure and she realizes what she needs and I feel honored to assume a good example for individuals who have ever felt other or extraordinary. I recollect how I used to feel sitting in front of the TV and seeing Sara Rue on "Prominent" on the grounds that she was a motivation to me. It's amusing on the grounds that what I cherish about Lauren is that she's proud and she's sure and she's creation Puck work for it and she's not simply searching for a come in the roughage. I feel that they are extremely sweet together, there is this helplessness when they are both such bosses and you set up them together and I think there is something extremely extraordinary there. What I acknowledge about Lauren is that she resembles I don't have to offer it to you, you're getting down to business for it, and I imagine that is an extraordinary message to send to young ladies. I imagine that he is stricken and she is likely somewhat stricken as well yet I think she has enough confidence not to surrender everything for the beguiling adorable kid that is somewhat after her." Kevin Fallon, an author for "The Atlantic", responded positively to the throwing of Fink: ""Glee" hit the trifecta this year with its three noteworthy cast increases. First there were Darren Criss—who's detonated with popularity—and Chord Overstreet. Presently there's Ashley Fink's Lauren. And keeping in mind that the extreme just outwardly Lauren can scrumptiously out-backtalk Santana Lopez, it's her straight-talking that truly has me sold." 

In her first scene, it is uncovered that Lauren is an individual from William McKinley High's wrestling group. "Television Squad" has said that "Lauren can convey a humdinger with the chomp of Sue Sylvester and the amusingness of our adored Brittany Pierce." Seth Abramovitch of "TV.com" communicated his disappointment with her mentality: "Zizes isn't only a substantial, remarkably certain young lady. She's additionally very vicious. She’s on the wrestling group, talks consistently of harming Puck, and, in one lobby smackdown against the envious Santana Lopez, demonstrated she was much something other than bark. What's more, you did get that part about Zizes needing to be well known for the wellbeing of famous, isn't that so? That she was eager to surrender herself to Puck absolutely in quest for an unscripted TV drama and aroma line? There’s a word for individuals who do things like that in reality: It's 'butt nugget'." He proceeded to include: "Zizes has been hailed by women's activists gatherings (well, by "Bust Magazine") as another sort of larger estimated heroine—an fat female good example who for once doesn't despise herself. Despite what might be expected, she supposes she's the honey bee's knees. At the point when 'Puck serenaded her with Queen's "Fat-Bottomed Girls," she repelled him, saying, 'I look like America looks, and simply like America, I need something beyond a melody to get my juices streaming'." 

Columnist James Poniewozik of "Time" magazine remarked of the scene "Senseless Love Songs": "It was the sort of curve "Merriment" can sell, somewhat in light of the manner in which the characters are set up (by and large, you can perceive how an extremely tough lady who rejects him is a turn-on for Puck) and due to how well its cast (Ashley Fink has been killing it as Lauren, and offers her certainty and abrasiveness such that makes her an individual, not a built positive-self-perception show). And keeping in mind that "Happiness" some of the time stretches to single out the-nose melody decisions, "Fat Bottomed Girls" was only an ideal decision and performance—not just on point yet quite Puck's melodic wheelhouse." 

Throughout "Joy" second season, Lauren frames an association with nearby terrible kid and football star Noah Puckerman. As the season advances, Lauren and Puck's relationship keeps on becoming more grounded. Their relationship starts to shape in the ninth scene of the second season titled "specialized curriculum". After Puck endeavors to enlist new individuals for the William McKinley High School joy club, individuals from the football crew lock him in a port-a-potty. Subsequent to being found by Lauren, he persuades her to join New Directions, regardless of her conviction that show choir is dumb. Ashley Fink said of their relationship: "I think Ryan Murphy has an end-all strategy and we're all sort of in the interest of personal entertainment. I comprehend what you mean, yet I wouldn't exclude us right now on that front. We as a whole need to giggle at ourselves however it's going some place. At last, it comes down to whether groups of onlookers will purchase a connection among Puck and Lauren. I believe there's an extremely comical science among Puck and Lauren. I believe he's a boss, she's a boss. I don't have a clue, I believe they're amusing together. There's something about both of them together that I like, so I trust it's not outside the domain of probability." 

TV pundits have reacted emphatically to the matching. Robert Canning of IGN said of the scene "Senseless Love Songs": "The most perfectly awesome piece of "Senseless Love Songs" was Puckerman's unforeseen aching for Lauren Zizes. Performer Ashley Fink has been incredible in her little job, conveying extraordinary jokes easily. She was similarly solid in this, the primary scene to really give Lauren a bigger job and round out her character more. Hell, it was pleasant to try and see her grin a couple of times. The throwing on "Happiness" has either been exceptionally savvy or extremely fortunate since such a large number of foundation characters have sparkled as they've been given greater parts. The Lauren and Puck matching accompanied a ton of giggles, however the same amount of heart. Puck singing Queen's "Fat Bottomed Girls," prompted a laugh at first, at that point some toe tapping. Be that as it may, it was Lauren's response that genuinely made the occasion: 'That is the primary melody you've sung to me and it made me feel like poo.' I can't choose on the off chance that I need to pull for this couple, yet I absolutely realize I will pull for Lauren." Todd VanDerWerff of "The A.V. Club" remarked: "For me, the scene's feature was the sweet, clever romance among Puck and Lauren. This might be on the grounds that the authors experience difficulty composing for a self-proclaimed terrible kid, despite the fact that his adventures are straight out of Archie funnies and not in reality all that “bad” by any means. Be that as it may, it’s constantly enjoyable to watch Salling sing, and it’s constantly amusing to watch him be stricken. Fink winds up being a decent counterpart for him, science astute, as she anticipates a certainty and assurance that makes it promptly clear exactly what Puck sees in Lauren. The storyline likewise played out like the two characters had something moving toward genuine sentiments." In the accompanying scene, VanDerWerff discovered her association with Puck "much less guaranteed" than previously, however "Amusement Weekly" Sandra Gonzalez considered their scenes "as charming as they are improbable", and E! Online's Jenna Mullins composed that "the ice around [her] heart liquefied a tad when Puck mouthed Lauren that smidgen of support toward the beginning of her performance." 

Lauren has gotten generally positive audits from TV commentators. Canning applauded Fink's execution in the scene "Senseless Love Songs", just as Lauren's exchange. Lisa Respers France of CNN remarked that she is starting to truly like Lauren, noticing: "for me Lauren speaks to how Ryan Murphy can take the idea of the pariah, flip it on its ear and push it back in our countenances with a side request of remarkableness." Reiter felt that in "Rebound", new characters Lauren and Sam "figured out how to sparkle". 

Rosie O'Donnell responded adversely to Fink's throwing and first solo melodic execution. In a meeting with Access Hollywood, she considered her interpretation of "I Know What Boys Like" disappointing, and expressed that it neglected to live up to her desires. She called Lauren "so unlikable," and addressed why the makers had not thrown a "quite substantial young lady". Fink forgot about O'Donnell's remarks. O'Donnell later apologized, and stated, "Gracious, Ashley – I cherish your swagger – your acting – your face – your heart – as a celebrated husky individual – I am regularly gotten some information about the issue‶ I adore the story line – I cherish the show – and if in any capacity something I said hurt you – I am sorry MORE. You are so capable, and I can hardly wait to hear you belt it‶as I know you can—the regularly misquoted Rosie." Fink was shielded by Justin Thompson of "Socialite Life", who remarked: "I've adored her character and how they've built up her and she's simply turned into a wellspring of incredible satire – is that since she's full-figured? No. Is it since her character is elegantly composed? Truly. It’s sort of tragic to see Rosie assail what the show is endeavoring to do." 

Raymund Flandez of "The Wall Street Journal" called Lauren's execution of "I Know What Boys Like" the feature of "Rebound". Gonzalez was not exactly enthused. She evaluated it "C−", after "findings", and said the main reason it began with a "C" was because of it being scattered with shots of the cast in their clothing. Patrick Burns of "The Atlantic" was likewise disinterested, and scrutinized Lauren's spot in the merriment club, remarking "her baldfaced character never stops to kindly however it's simply not acceptable that she would join the joy club on the off chance that she can't sing."