Influenza Season (Parks and Recreation) 

"Influenza Season" (here and there alluded to as "The Flu") is the second scene of the third period of the American satire TV arrangement "Parks and Recreation", and the 32nd in general scene of the arrangement. It initially disclosed on NBC in the United States on January 27, 2011. In the scene, an influenza episode leaves Leslie sick, however she demands making an open introduction about her proposed gather celebration. In the mean time, Andy and Ron bond, and an emergency clinic bound April torments the medical attendant Ann. 

The scene was composed by Norm Hiscock and coordinated by Wendey Stanzler. The scene included significant improvement of the characters Ann, Ron and Ben, the last of whom turns out to be incredibly inspired with Leslie, beginning a season-long sentiment subplot between the two characters. Brent Briscoe showed up as J.J., proprietor of J.J's. Diner, an eatery that has showed up in past "Parks" scenes. 

As per Nielsen Media Research, "Influenza Season" was seen by 5.83 million family watchers, a six percent decrease from the past scene, third season debut "Pull out all the stops or Go Home". The scene got positive audits, with numerous pundits calling it one of the show's best scenes. Commentators additionally commended the execution of Rob Lowe amid the scenes when Chris is stricken by this season's flu virus. Commentators said the connection among Chris and Ann made her character considerably more fascinating and amusing. 

Amy Poehler presented this scene for making a decision for her assignment for the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Comedy Series in 2011. 

This season's cold virus season has hit Pawnee hard, leaving medical caretaker Ann (Rashida Jones) thinking about many wiped out residents at the emergency clinic. Among them are April (Aubrey Plaza), who always abuses Ann in countering for kissing Andy (Chris Pratt). April asks Ron (Nick Offerman) not to disclose to Andy she is in the emergency clinic, and Ron is on edge not to get engaged with their own undertakings. Leslie (Amy Poehler) likewise has this season's cold virus, however won't let it be known in light of the fact that she needs to give an essential introduction to the Pawnee Chamber of Commerce about the arranged Harvest Festival, which she expectations will reestablish the decreasing spending plan of the parks division. Ben (Adam Scott) at long last takes a hesitant Leslie to the clinic, where she is conceded with a hazardously high fever and lack of hydration. Ben and Tom (Aziz Ansari) choose to do the introduction themselves, a lot to the shame of Leslie, who does not confide in anybody but rather herself to do it. Tom promptly forsakes Ben to spend time with a gathering of more established men at the spa. 

Shockingly, Chris (Rob Lowe) has additionally been admitted to the medical clinic with this season's flu virus. The two have been dating and, in spite of the fact that Ann truly loves Chris, she fears he is excessively flawless. Be that as it may, in light of the fact that the amazingly wellbeing cognizant Chris has a poor safe framework and almost no muscle to fat ratio, he endures a total physical breakdown, which makes Ann feel less threatened about dating him. Then, Leslie gets away from the emergency clinic and heads back to city corridor to convey the introduction herself. Tom comes back from the spa, uncovering his spa companions are the proprietors of a few vehicle vendors, which have consented to loan vehicles to the celebration. Albeit ridiculous with fever and an abundance of influenza drug, Leslie conveys a faultless introduction, uncontrollably inspiring Ben. She is promptly taken back to the clinic, where Ben discloses to her 110 organizations have consented to help with the celebration, outperforming the base 80 required. 

At the office, with April missing from work, Ron requests that Andy fill in as a right hand on the grounds that the counter government situated Ron trusts Andy will be ineffectual. The two bond through the span of the day, and Andy starts to educate Ron concerning his issues with April, for whom despite everything he harbors sentimental emotions. Albeit at first not wishing to get included, Ron reluctantly discloses to Andy she is at the medical clinic and he should visit her. In the mean time, Ann stays charming all through her nursing shift notwithstanding April's consistent maltreatment. The second her day of work closes, be that as it may, Ann quickly loses her temper and reviles at April. Ann apologizes for kissing Andy, however demands it was a mix-up and that April should quit taking it out on Andy. Afterward, Andy visits April, who claims to be snoozing however grins, uncovering she is glad he came. 

Toward the finish of the scene, Chris discloses to Ben they have been gotten back to Indianapolis for another task, however both consent to look for an expansion to remain in Pawnee longer. Albeit both case they need to help sort out the Harvest Festival, it is indicated they truly need to remain on account of Leslie and Ann. 

"Influenza Season" was composed by Norm Hiscock and coordinated by Wendey Stanzler. Like each of the six of the primary third season scenes, it was composed and shot very quickly after the second season finished as a major aspect of an early shooting calendar expected to oblige Amy Poehler's pregnancy. Notwithstanding, albeit completed right off the bat fully expecting a September 2010 discharge date, "Parks" was eventually put on break until mid 2011, numerous months after creation on "Influenza Season" was at that point wrapped up. Albeit at first titled "The Flu" in unique official statements, and alluded to accordingly by a few news articles, the scene title was later formally changed to "Influenza Season". "Influenza Season" proceeded the subplot of reestablishing the parks division spending plan through a reap celebration, which will keep on being a noteworthy story bend all through the initial six scenes of the period. Brent Briscoe shows up in "Influenza Season" as J.J., the proprietor of J.J's. Diner. Despite the fact that the eatery shows up in the past scene "The Reporter", "Summer Catalog" and "The Master Plan", "Influenza Season" denoted the primary appearance of J.J. himself. 

Michael Schur, co-maker of "Parks and Recreation", said the scene included improvement of a few of the hero characters, including Ben Wyatt, Ann Perkins, and Ron Swanson. One of the significant story circular segments of the period involves Ben, who had never had a firm feeling of home, bit by bit beginning to look all starry eyed at the town of Pawnee because of the positive thinking and energy Leslie Knope appears for the town and her activity. Pundits proposed this change seemed to start in "Influenza Season", when Ben is unmistakably, amazingly awed by Leslie's ideal redemption of an open introduction in spite of her sickness. Steve Kandell of "New York" magazine expressed: "This is clearly the minute when Ben’s resenting regard for her progresses toward becoming something different", and "The Atlantic" essayist Scott Meslow stated: "Parks and Recreation has enabled Ben to create out of sight up until now, yet his love for Pawnee is plainly developing." 

"Influenza Season" additionally showed a takeoff in the manner Ann's sentimental connections were taken care of contrasted with past seasons. The character recently dated Andy Dwyer and Mark Brendanawicz (Paul Schneider), who was worked out of the show toward the second's end season. In the two cases, Ann was essentially responsible for the relationship because of Andy's adolescence and Mark's absence of involvement in long haul sentiments. Schur said of Ann's association with Chris, "This is the first occasion when that Ann just totally loses herself and truly falls for a person too hard. What's more, the relationship goes in a ton of clever, sudden bearings." Intimidated by her failure to discover a defect in the very positive and physically flawless Chris, Ann acts more unadroitly and geeky around him than her character has been before. "Influenza Season" likewise exhibited further dimensions to Ron Swanson, who stubbornly demands "I'm not keen on thinking about individuals", yet uncovers he thinks about both Andy and April, and endeavors to enable the two to accommodate. Schur said Ron takes on a kind of dad figure job, "and he winds up uncovering in a modest, little, modest way that is still consistent with the character that he has real sentiments of thinking about the general population who work around him in the Parks office". 

In the scene, Ben looks at Leslie's conveyance of an ideal introduction notwithstanding having this season's flu virus to ball player Michael Jordan's appearing amid the 1997 NBA Finals. Amid the of the arrangement, Jordan lead the Chicago Bulls to triumph notwithstanding experiencing a genuine instance of this season's cold virus. Ben additionally analyzes Leslie's discourse to the acclaimed grand slam baseball player Kirk Gibson hit off of pitcher Dennis Eckersley amid the 1988 World Series, regardless of Gibson experiencing wounds to the two legs at the time. While holding, Ron and Andy examine the draft history of the Indianapolis Colts, the NFL football crew of Indiana. At the point when Andy recommends Ron eat a burrito called the "Meat Tornado", Ron says, "You had me at Meat Tornado," a reference to the line "You had me at hi" from the sentimental show film "Jerry Maguire" (1996). While misdirected by this season's cold virus, Leslie erroneously alludes to the council of trade as the "Assembly of Secrets", a reference to the dream novel "Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets". At a certain point, while rehearsing her discourse ridiculous with seasonal influenza, Leslie swings to a divider notice and says, "Great night everybody, I'm Leslie Monster and this is "Nightline"," a reference to the NBC newsmagazine program. Afterward, while still insane, Leslie acquaints Ben with the introduction gathering of people as "Scott Bakula from "Quantum Leap"". 

In its unique American communicate, "Influenza Season" was seen by an expected 5.83 million family watchers, as indicated by Nielsen Media Research, with a generally speaking 3.0 rating/8 share, and 3.2 rating/5 share among watchers between ages 18 and 49. It denoted a six percent decay contrasted with the past scene, "Pull out all the stops or Go Home", which itself was the most noteworthy generally "Parks" rating for since the debut scene. The night "Influenza Season" was communicated, practically the majority of the satire appears in NBC's Thursday lineup lost viewership contrasted with the earlier week: while "Network" stayed level, "Flawless Couples" was down 19 percent, while "The Office" and "30 Rock" were down 11 percent. 

"Influenza Season" got commonly positive surveys, with numerous reporters commending the execution of Rob Lowe, whose character is typically physically fit to practically superhuman extents yet turns out to be amazingly sick and illusory when tainted with this season's flu virus. Tim Goodman of "The Hollywood Reporter" said Lowe's character currently appeared to be well-coordinated into the cast, including "On the off chance that you've never trusted Lowe can make you roar with laughter, focus on that scene." Steve Kandell of "New York" magazine said Lowe stole the show from the standard thing "Parks" powerhouses of Offerman and Pratt, and called one scene, when Lowe endeavors to will away his influenza by hollering to himself in the mirror "Stop...pooping!", the "single most noteworthy self-effacingly comic snapshot of his long, attractive vocation". "The Atlantic" author Scott Meslow said after two scenes, the matching of Chris and Ann was at that point all the more fascinating that Ann's whole association with Mark Brendanawicz in the second season, and that the new sentiment subplot permitted the typically "straight (wo)man" Rashida Jones to show her comedic abilities. "Diversion Weekly" author Hillary Busis said Chris "truly made his mark" in the scene, and furthermore said that Ann's association with Chris made her character additionally intriguing and gave Jones more prominent comedic material to work with. 

HitFix author Alan Sepinwall pronounced "Influenza Season" the one scene he would recommend to newcomers trying to get comfortable with "Parks and Recreation" since it spotlights such huge numbers of various characters, incorporates both warm and comedic minutes, and incorporates critique on community government. He applauded the exhibitions of Lowe and Poehler, the last of whom was particularly viable in light of the fact that there were genuine stakes to Leslie making her introduction. Matt Fowler of IGN additionally said Lowe's character, which he dreaded would get old quick, had ended up being a solid advantage for the show, and Ann's character was at her most grounded inverse him. In any case, Fowler additionally said "Influenza Season" was a solid outfit with incredible character minutes for everybody, including Ron and Andy's holding and Ben's profound respect of Leslie. The A.V. Club author Steve Heisler said "Influenza Season" allowed the whole cast to be somewhat sillier than expected and exhibit their wide comedic ranges. Heisler said Ben and Chris felt like they had a place among different characters, and he applauded the execution of Aubrey Plaza, guaranteeing April's character appeared to be more fleshed out than in past scenes. 

Zap2it author Rick Porter called "Influenza Season" a standout amongst the best scenes of "Parks and Recreation", especially applauding the "extraordinary teamup" of Ron and the "distinctive shades of Ann" showed in the show. Watchman said he at the same time cherished both Lowe's ludicrous execution while wiped out, and Poehler's progressively inconspicuous execution. Matt Richenthal of TV Fanatic said the way Chris has turned out to be so very much coordinated into the show exhibits how well the journalists keep apparently strange characters grounded. Richenthal said Poehler influenced her debilitated scenes to appear solid character minutes as opposed to simply droll satire, and lauded the scenes with Ron and Andy, just as Tom's scenes at the spa. Joel Keller of TV Squad said the scene emphatically built up the characters Ben and Chris, and filled in as an exhibit for the comedic abilities of Poehler, who he complimented for not going too preposterous. Hollywood.com author Eric Sundermann said the scene displayed "Parks and Recreation" at its best, and said both Poehler and Lowe gave a portion of their best execution to date. Sundermann applauded the blending of Offerman and Pratt, and said in spite of the fact that he had second thoughts about a Ben and Leslie sentiment, he trusted it got off to an enchanting begin in "Influenza Season".