Ron &amp; Tammy: Part Two 

"Ron and Tammy: Part Two" (at times alluded to as "Ron and Tammy II") is the fourth scene of the third period of the American satire TV arrangement "Parks and Recreation", and the 34th generally scene of the arrangement. It initially publicized on NBC in the United States on February 10, 2011. In the scene, Tom endeavors to make Ron envious by dating Ron's ex Tammy, making the two resume their unfortunate and dangerous relationship. In the interim, Leslie and Ben approach the police to give security to the gather celebration, and April is allocated to be Chris' secretary. 

Composed by Emily Kapnek and coordinated by Tucker Gates, the scene is viewed as a spin-off of the second season scene "Ron and Tammy". Megan Mullally, the genuine spouse of on-screen character Nick Offerman, repeats her job as Tammy. Mullally and Offerman were allowed a lot of act of spontaneity amid their scenes, the them two conceding in the sound discourse that their graphically cozy scenes together really made other cast individuals awkward. "Ron and Tammy: Part Two" additionally includes visitor appearances by Eric Pierpoint as Pawnee Police Chief Trumple and Jama Williamson in the remainder of a few visitor exhibitions as Tom's ex, Wendy. 

At the point when the scene first communicate, NBC ran a business publicizing "April and Andy's wedding library" on the official "Parks and Recreation" site. Albeit evidently an error expected to allude to Ron and Tammy's library, a few analysts recommended it could be characteristic of future occasions in the arrangement. As indicated by Nielsen Media Research, "Ron and Tammy: Part Two" was seen by 5.03 million family unit watchers, a slight increment from the past scene, "Time Capsule". It got basic approval, with a few observers applauding the re-matching of Ron and Tammy, just as Nick Offerman's execution. 

Ron's (Nick Offerman) ex Tammy (Megan Mullally) proceeds with her endeavors to attack his life, yet the regularly powerless Ron effectively opposes her enticements since he is currently in a strong association with Tom's (Aziz Ansari) ex Wendy (Jama Williamson), a lot to Tom's envy. Afterward, in any case, Wendy and Ron separate after she declares she is moving back to Canada. In the interim, Leslie (Amy Poehler) and the parks division set up a gathering for the Pawnee police office, where they would like to approach them to give security to the up and coming Harvest Festival. Amid the gathering, Ben (Adam Scott) ponderously neglects to get Chief Trumple's (Eric Pierpoint) support. Tom, ignorant of Ron and Wendy's separation, touches base at the gathering with Tammy to make him desirous. In the wake of quarreling boisterously, Ron and Tammy both choose to leave the gathering together to talk and attempt to offer some kind of reparation. Notwithstanding, a night loaded up with tanked sex and anarchy results, finishing with the two getting remarried and winding up in prison. 

In the wake of getting Ron discharged, the parks division holds a mediation for him about Tammy, notwithstanding playing a recently recorded tape of Ron cautioning himself to avoid her. Ron disregards the alerts and gets ready to take Tammy to his lodge for a sex-filled special first night after her wedding party. Leslie reprimands Tom for the quandary and, in spite of the fact that he at first professes to be courageous, Tom later touches base at the wedding party to prevent Ron from going on the special night. He uncovers the entire marriage is a ploy by Tammy to by and by make him hopeless. Tammy assaults and barbarously beats Tom, inciting Ron to recall what a beast she really is and dump her. He truly diverts Tom, and the two later offer some kind of reparation. Regardless of the terrible impression he made the day preceding, Ben approaches Trumple for the Harvest Festival support. The boss genuinely concurs keeping in mind Leslie, who he said dependably helps everybody, and on the grounds that Leslie once dated his companion Dave (Louis C.K.). Ben appears to be alleviated Leslie and Dave are never again together, and he later asks Leslie out to eat. 

In the B story, April (Aubrey Plaza) is filling in as Chris' (Rob Lowe) collaborator until he returns to Indianapolis. April's negative identity conflicts with Chris' persevering positive thinking and bliss. While trying to get terminated, April intentionally fails to tell Ann (Rashida Jones) that Chris can't make a get-together. At the point when Ann lands to stand up to Chris, she rapidly understands April's ploy. Ann uncovers she is exceptionally cheerful dating Chris, and would even presumably move with him to Indianapolis whenever inquired. Andy (Chris Pratt), who is as yet attempting to win back April's affections, gives Chris a clearly produced letter from the FBI guaranteeing April should quickly come back to the parks division. Chris sees through the stratagem and reveals to April she can return, yet that outstanding his right hand may give her profession openings. He welcomes her to come back with him to Indianapolis and she appears to be intrigued, leaving both Ann and Andy staggered and envious. 

"Ron and Tammy: Part Two", now and then casually alluded to as "Ron and Tammy II", was composed by "Parks" counseling maker Emily Kapnek and coordinated by Tucker Gates, who has recently coordinated scenes of "The Office", another parody arrangement made by "Parks" co-maker Greg Daniels. Like the majority of the initial six third season scenes, it was composed and taped very quickly after the second season finished as a feature of an early shooting calendar expected to oblige Amy Poehler's pregnancy. Notwithstanding, albeit completed from the get-go fully expecting a September 2010 discharge date, "Parks" was at last set on rest until mid 2011, numerous months after creation on "Ron and Tammy: Part Two" was done. The scene is viewed as a continuation of the second season scene "Ron and Tammy", which presented the character of Ron Swanson's ex, Tammy, and their undesirable association with one another. Megan Mullally, the genuine spouse of on-screen character Nick Offerman, repeats her job as Tammy. "Ron and Tammy" was a standout amongst the most generally welcomed scenes of the second season, so the scholars promptly began thinking about approaches to bring the character back. 

Offerman said he functioned admirably with Mullally, and that the two both appreciate "stretching the limits and testing our limits, both of physical capacity and great taste". He tongue in cheek said of taping the scene: 

"They reveal to me it's very something. I sincerely don't recollect quite a bit of what occurred amid the taping of that scene since it resembled an insane peyote fever dream. I recall there was loads of wailing, and I left away sore and scarred. Portions of my life structures were alarmingly abraded. They state it turned out well. I'm eager to see it." 

Offerman and Mullally were permitted to ad lib a lot amid taping. The scene includes a montage of different clasps indicating how Ron and Tammy bit by bit run from battling with one another to getting hitched through the span of an especially wild night. Long successions of film were shot — including Ron and Tammy boisterously contending on the walkway and the two making out on a squad car — however minimal in excess of a couple of moments at last made the last scene. Offerman said it took about a half hour for the hair office to give him his cornrows hair style. He said he delighted simultaneously, saying it "felt like a firm head knead". 

Mullally said Tammy is required to show up again in future scenes: "It appears as though it's kind of a once a season-ish sort of occasion. At the point when Tammy appears, it practically conveys Ron to a sudden stop." Mullally and "Parks" co-star Adam Scott likewise featured together in the Starz parody arrangement "Gathering Down". "Ron and Tammy: Part Two" highlighted the remainder of a few visitor exhibitions of Jama Williamson as Wendy, who uncovered she was coming back to her nation of origin of Canada to think about her maturing guardians. Pawnee Police Chief Trumple was depicted by Eric Pierpoint, who has played a few cops all through his vocation, including an outsider cop in the sci-fi arrangement "Outsider Nation" and a police boss in the hero show arrangement "The Cape." 

Following "Ron and Tammy: Part Two" first broadcast on February 10, 2011, NBC ran a business promoting "April and Andy's wedding library" on the official "Parks and Recreation" site. This appeared to be conflicting with the show's storyline on the grounds that, in spite of the fact that April and Andy had recently communicated sentimental enthusiasm for one another, the two had isolated and were not yet accommodated at the season of the scene. Not long after the scene circulated, HitFix TV analyst Alan Sepinwall composed that the business erroneously utilized the wrong names and was really alluding to Ron and Tammy's wedding vault, which was referenced in "Ron and Tammy: Part Two" and was in fact included on the "Parks and Recreation" site. In any case, while pictures of both April and Andy were highlighted in the business, Tammy herself was not, and a few pundits proposed the blunder could be characteristic of future occasions in the arrangement. Andy and April in the long run married in the scene "Andy and April's Fancy Party". A while later, "Parks" co-maker Michael Schur conceded the business was proposed to keep running with that scene, however kept running with "Ron and Tammy: Part Two" because of a mistake by NBC workers: 

"With an end goal to fix the spoiler, we freely expressed, in various meetings, that NBC had quite recently incidentally gotten the character names wrong, and that there was no up and coming Andy-April wedding. We earnestly trust that enthusiasts of the show are cool with us tenderly deceiving them, with an end goal to keep up the unexpected pre-marriage ceremony as much as we could. Presently on the off chance that you'll pardon us, we need to go shoot the season finale shock Jerry-Donna wedding scene." 

In its unique American communicate, "Ron and Tammy: Part Two" was seen by an expected 5.03 million family unit watchers, as per Nielsen Media Research, with a by and large 3.0 rating/5 share, and a 2.5 rating/7 share among watchers between ages 18 and 49. It denoted a slight increment in viewership contrasted with the past scene, "Time Capsule". The night "Ron and Tammy: Part Two" was communicated, "Parks and Recreation" was beated in its timeslot by the CBS wrongdoing show arrangement "", which was seen by 12.78 million families; the ABC restorative dramatization arrangement "Dark's Anatomy", which was seen by 10.4 million family watchers; and the Fox parody dramatization arrangement "Bones", which was seen by 9.5 million families. 

"Ron and Tammy: Part Two" got profoundly positive audits, with a few reporters commending the fixing of Ron and Tammy, Nick Offerman's execution and, specifically, the line in which Ron clarifies how part of his mustache progressed toward becoming shaved off: "It scoured off... from contact." "Amusement Weekly" essayist Hillary Busis said she dreaded Megan Mullally couldn't satisfy her execution in "Ron and Tammy", yet she said the subsequent scene "gave "Parks and Rec" fans all that they could seek after and that's only the tip of the iceberg". Busis likewise applauded the blending of the excited Chris and the emotionless April. Alan Sepinwall of HitFix delighted in that the content did not just repeat the first "Ron and Tammy" story, yet rather played it well off the Tom, Wendy and Ron love triangle. Sepinwall additionally lauded the Chris/April blending and the way that Adam Scott got the chance to accomplish more than play his typical straight man job. He included that he trusted each season would have a Ron and Tammy-driven scene, however confine it to once per year in the style of "Cheers" Bar Wars scenes. 

The A.V. Club essayist Steve Heisler said the scene was "just about more or less great", a few extraordinary minutes rotating around Nick Offerman's dull comedic conveyance. Heisler likewise said making the police division some portion of the content was a decent method to more readily substance out Pawnee and its townspeople. "New York" magazine author Steve Kandell lauded the exhibitions of Offerman and Aubrey Plaza, and alluded to Tammy as Pawnee's likeness Sideshow Bob in "The Simpsons"<nowiki>'</nowiki> Springfield. Kandell likewise enjoyed that the scene "had heart" on the grounds that the Tammy subplot was settled by Ron going to bat for Tom. Television Squad essayist Joel Keller said the scene did not achieve the dimension of the first "Ron and Tammy", however that "despite everything it had all that anyone could need amusing, cringeworthy and out and out gross minutes to be fulfilling". He proclaimed Mullally "a standout amongst the best sitcom manifestations this side of Colonel Flagg on "M*A*S*H"". "The Atlantic" essayist Scott Meslow lauded Ron Swanson as the show's "breakout character", and said "Ron and Tammy: Part Two" was good to the point that he sought after another spin-off scene in the following season. 

Rick Porter of Zap2it said the scene included a few incredible scenes among Ron and Tammy and considered it a "visit de constrain" for Nick Offerman, yet in addition valued that the scene highlighted solid minutes outside that fundamental plotline. He considered it the best comedic grandstand for Adam Scott so far in the season, and lauded both the matching of April and Chris, and the way that subplot prompted Ann's perplexity about her future with Chris. Eric Sundermann of Hollywood.com said the subplot with April and Chris showed how "Parks" frequently prevails with regards to blending two characters that regularly appear to have little association with one another. Sundermann likewise delighted in how Ben's clumsiness around the police boss represented how "the show is ending up increasingly more clear on who comprehends and fits in Pawnee, versus who doesn't". Television Fanatic essayist Matt Richenthal said the dynamic among Ron and Tammy functioned admirably because of their genuine relationship, yet in addition due to the harmony between "the couple's absurd tricks and the heart it appeared in different territories". Richenthal likewise complimented the execution of Chris Pratt as the "sweet, good natured, air-headed Andy".