You Don't Know Jack (2011 computer game) 

You Don't Know Jack is a 2011 computer game of the gathering type discharged by different home consoles and handhelds dependent on the arrangement of You Don't Know Jack amusements. The diversion was created by Jellyvision Games and distributed by THQ, and was discharged in North America on February 8, 2011, for Microsoft Windows, PlayStation 3, Xbox 360, Wii and Nintendo DS stages. It is the main title in the arrangement discharged by Jellyvision following an eight-year break, exploiting on the web network and different highlights of present day gaming supports. A solitary player iOS port was discharged around two months after the fact, yet was later pulled fully expecting an increasingly hearty customer dependent on the Facebook form of the amusement. 

The diversion is organized around an anecdotal amusement show emceed by Cookie Masterson (voiced by Tom Gottlieb), in which the players answer ten different decision questions, and after that contend in a last "Jack Attack" round. Noting rapidly and accurately procures virtual cash to follow the players' scores, while off base answers are punished. According to the amusement's witticism, "the contemptuous random data party diversion", the inquiries regularly join general information with pop culture references and verbal wit to decide the right answer. Not at all like the prior discharges which haphazardly introduced inquiries, the 2011 diversion furnishes in excess of 73 scenes with a predefined set of inquiries, and with further scenes to be made accessible as DLC, just accessible on the Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3 through the two consoles' particular online stores. 

The diversion, on consoles, bolsters both disconnected and online play (except for the Wii which needs online multiplayer) with up to four players, while the Microsoft Windows and Nintendo DS forms just help two nearby players and need highlights, for example, online play and access to download different DLC Packs. "You Don't Know Jack" was commonly generally welcomed, seen as an amusing come back to frame for the arrangement, however the absence of online play or extra substance for the Microsoft Windows rendition was reprimanded. 

"You Don't Know Jack" is happened as an anecdotal question and answer contest appear for one to four players, with the objective to win the most virtual cash toward the finish of the amusement. Each diversion utilizes a pre-characterized set of ten inquiries from more than seventy scenes, titled by the name of the show's anecdotal support. Most inquiries are various decision, giving one right and three inaccurate answers, alongside a short clock that begins once the inquiry has been totally introduced. All players play in the meantime, entering their decision of answer before the 20 second clock runs out. In the event that a player is right, they get a base dollar sum in addition to a reward characterized by how rapidly they replied, while on the off chance that they miss the inquiry, they lose a comparative measure of cash. Neglecting to answer does not cost the player any cash. 

Every player in multiplayer amusements is likewise given a solitary chance to "screw" another player, compelling them to respond to the inquiry in an a lot shorter timeframe. In the event that the chose player answers inaccurately or neglects to address the inquiry, they lose cash which is picked up by the player utilizing the screw. Notwithstanding, if the chose player answers effectively, they increase extra cash taken from the player utilizing the screw. 

The diversion's incidental data depends on general information from a few fields including science, history, and topography, joined with contemporary excitement, famous people, and different news things; the amusement, just as the arrangement, is frequently depicted as "high culture meets popular culture". For instance, one inquiry requests that the players recognize which Jennifer Aniston film title would probably have been appropriate for a theoretical lighthearted comedy written by Albert Einstein about the communications among neutrons and electrons, the appropriate response being ""He's Just Not That Into You"". Notwithstanding the standard inquiries, every scene normally includes a "Dis or Dat" question. This inquiry gives the players seven words or expressions which they need to recognize as one of two conceivable groupings, or at times, both. For instance, one Dis or Dat arrangement requests that the players recognize terms that would be highlights of a Nexus One telephone, Nexxus cleanser, or both. In disconnected play, just a single player partakes, while different players endeavor to take by hitting the nail on the head if the principle player fails to understand the situation. In online play, all players play the Dis Or Dat all the while. Players are likewise asked to search for the "Wrong Answer of the Game", which is indicated by the show's support; for instance, in a scene supported by a bassinet organization, the appropriate response "Feline's Cradle" is the Wrong Answer of the Game. Picking the right Wrong Answer does not punish the player but rather compensates them with an expansive money related reward. Different inquiries are exhibited in the standard numerous decision position however utilize repeating ideas, for example, questions dependent on a fortune treat message, or ones read through Cookie's ventriloquist sham consolidating a discourse obstacle that may make the inquiry harder to get it. 

After ten inquiries are finished, the last round of the diversion is the "Jack Attack" where all players go up against one another. Preceding the cycle, a concise piece of information is appeared to the players to depict a relationship that they should coordinate, for instance "BFF" (Best companions until the end of time). The diversion at that point demonstrates single word or expression, and afterward goes through different expressions which the players must match. On the off chance that players react to the wrong expression, they lose cash; just the primary player to buzz in at the right time wins and wins cash. After seven such expressions, the absolute scores are included and the victor is resolved. 

"You Don't Know Jack" was created by Chicago-based organization Jellyvision. The "You Don't Know Jack" ("YDKJ") arrangement, however well known during the 1990s amid the ascent of gaming on PCs, had not had an official full discharge since 1998 with "You Don't Know Jack: The Ride". In spite of the fact that Jellyvision offered some online "You Don't Know Jack" diversions then years, the engineers left the gaming market subsequent to seeing the ascent of home gaming reassures in the mid 2000s. Despite the fact that they had considered adjusting the diversion for consoles, and had delivered two titles for the first PlayStation, they could just acknowledge "You Don't Know Jack" amusements with players at a similar console for information. Amid this time, Jellyvision rethought itself as Jellyvision Labs, offering its administrations in business-to-business correspondence including for assessment programming from H&R Block and meetings for Equifax. 

Around 2008, the organization saw that gaming supports had created highlights for availability and social play. They additionally perceived that the market for such question and answer contests was thin at the time and saw a conceivable chance to rejuvenate the arrangement. Close to this time, Jellyvision Labs was spun out to its own organization, Jellyvision Games, LLC, which would later be reincorporated in 2011 as Jellyvision Games, Inc. Harry Gottlieb, the author of Jellyvision, perceived that a large number of similar individuals that took a shot at the first recreations were still in the organization, and proposed the possibility of another "You Don't Know Jack" title to distributers. In the wake of verifying THQ as a distributer, full-time improvement for the diversion began in February 2010. Steve Heinrich, the amusement's maker, said the improvement procedure was "madly speedy", enabling them to work simultaneously on composing, craftsmanship, sound, and programming, and had the adaptability to settle on plan choices to keep the diversion basic and entertaining. Notwithstanding, the inquiry composing staff observed a portion of the due dates to be excessively short, forestalling them for doing broad group of onlookers input. 

Jellyvision Games did not have any desire to change a great part of the more seasoned amusements for the 2011 adaptation. They tried to keep the same number of the old diversion question types, for example, the Jack Attack and Dis Or Dat questions, refreshing the recreations to help online play. To offset different sorts that would not be playable on consoles, for example, Gibberish Questions that expected players to type in an expression, the engineers added new highlights to the amusement, for example, the Wrong Answer of the Game. The designers exploited different highlights of the fresher consoles: they had the capacity to utilize thunder highlights of comfort controllers to underscore the impact of Screwing different players, and composed a few silly titles for the in-diversion accomplishments. 

Allard Laban of Jellyvision Games noticed that contrasted with 1995, where the popular culture was "divided", the beginning of the Internet and online networking made it simpler to create inquiries for the amusement. In the meantime, with more data and amusement accessible, the authors must be particular about what parts of culture would stay applicable; a precedent given by Heinrich was that while inquiries concerning "Seinfeld" were alright, inquiries regarding "Frantic About You" were definitely not. Jellyvision Games looked for satire scholars, including from neighborhood parody clubs, for example, Second City and I.O., narrowing down the pool of candidates from hundreds to six, including Second City entertainer Tim Sniffen, who had dealt with past emphasess of the "You Don't Know Jack" arrangement. A week by week preparing process was utilized to update the new authors and survey recently composed exchange for conceivable upgrades. Heinrich additionally guaranteed that material was not rehashed all through the amusement's content. Heinrich gauges that each inquiry in the amusement was a consequence of around two hours of work. 

Most of the amusement's discourse is given by Tom Gottlieb, sibling of Harry, who had voiced the emcee "Treat" Masterson in the prior diversions, and had been viewed as one of the more famous emcees by players. Coming up short on any expert studio, the greater part of the 100-200 hrs of diversion discourse were recorded in an alternative soundproofed storage room. Tom Gottlieb was additionally associated with the composition procedure, as Jellyvision Games credits a significant part of the "Treat" persona to his very own execution of the character. Other audio effects incorporate phony advertisements that are heard when a diversion; a portion of these incorporate ads utilized in past emphasess of the "You Don't Know Jack" arrangement. Preceding every inquiry, the amusement incorporates short melodic interstitials with enlivened numbers to present the inquiry by means of its number. These were structured as to stall out in the players' heads as something they would recall for the duration of the day; to abstain from making these become excessively standard, certain scenes included minor departure from the interstitial that would be surprising, keeping players on their toes all through playing the diversion. 

The diversion was discharged in North America on February 8, 2011. Jellyvision Games has expressed they thought about further global discharges, however these future excessively costly right now. The organization does not discount future emphasess of the amusement being discharged to a more extensive market dependent on the accomplishment of this title. 

An underlying form of this rendition of "You Don't Know Jack" was discharged for iOS frameworks in April 2011. It highlighted twenty 10-question scenes, yet was constrained to a solitary player mode. Jellyvision Games later pulled the application, fully expecting arrival of a progressively vigorous customer for the two iOS and Android that will impersonate the Facebook application, highlighting cross-stage multiplayer between iOS, Android, and Facebook forms, and downloadable scenes from the Facebook amusement. 

"You Don't Know Jack" was emphatically gotten by faultfinders who were pleased not just with another section in the arrangement, yet one that kept a similar silliness and mind as the prior diversions. Seth Schiesel of "The New York Times" lauded the "triumphant, clever and notwithstanding edifying return" of the arrangement, refering to the imagination of the composition and voice work. John Teti of "The A.V. Club" considered the title an "amazingly decent amusement", and was awed that the composition of the diversion was as clever as the past recreations in the arrangement in spite of the long stretches of torpidity. Despite the fact that Teti regretted about the absence of console bases questions, he commended the new inquiry types and ongoing interaction as the general change "limits victories and keeps the pace lively". Greg Miller of IGN considered the amusement an extraordinary esteem, crediting it to the diversion's "incredible comical inclination, sharp adjusts and enough inquiries to keep you occupied for some time". 

Kevin Kelly of G4 TV lauded the voice work, especially that for "Treat", as "Without Cookie, this amusement would rapidly be simply one more forgettable question and answer contest". Jeff Cork of "Amusement Informer" considered the diversion "evidence that recreations don’t should be unreasonably unpredictable so as to be fun", complimenting the "first rate" composing. Chris Watters of GameSpot remarked that the structure of every scene can end up tedious, and that ordinarily the Jack Attack round would choose the champ of the diversion, refuting the past inquiries, yet at the same time considered the "substantial measure of authentically sharp and shockingly amusing composition" a key part of making "You Don't Know Jack" as "a standout amongst the most engaging question and answer contests available". Gamepro's Nathan Grayson was progressively disparaging of the amusement's absence of highlights, considering the quantity of inquiries "agonizingly short" contrasted with the "Buzz!" question and answer contest arrangement, "irrefutably the no frills nuts and bolts" introduction, and the diversion's to some degree adolescent comical inclination. In spite of the fact that the "Toronto Sun"s Steve Tilley for the most part adulated the amusement's silliness, he noticed the absence of assortment of interactivity modes, and that playing with individuals online might be ruined by those that had just gone through all the diversion's scenes. 

Both the Microsoft Windows and Nintendo DS variants were scrutinized for constraining the quantity of players to two. The Windows rendition was especially scrutinized as it didn't take into consideration online play, an element accessible on the Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3 discharges, nor would get the downloadable substance for the amusement. The absence of multiplayer in the pulled iOS form was mourned however different aspects of the amusement's diversion remained.