A Meeting by the River 

A Meeting by the River is a collection recorded by Ry Cooder and Vishwa Mohan Bhatt; it was recorded in September 1992 and discharged in April 1993 through the record mark Water Lily Acoustics. This ad libbed, community oriented collection highlights Cooder on slide guitar and Bhatt on the "Mohan veena", a stringed instrument made by Bhatt. "A Meeting by the River" was delivered by Kavichandran Alexander and Jayant Shah, designed by Alexander, and aced by Kevin Michael Gray and Paul Stubblebine. It topped at number four on "Board" Top World Music Albums outline, and earned Cooder and Bhatt Grammy Awards for Best World Music Album at the 36th Grammy Awards (1994). The collection is incorporated into Tom Moon's 2008 book "1,000 Recordings to Hear Before You Die". 

"A Meeting by the River" was recorded in September 1992; it highlights Cooder exclusively on slide guitar and Bhatt on the "Mohan veena", a stringed instrument he made. Allmusic's Daniel Gioffre depicted the instrument as a cross breed between a guitar and a "vichitra veena"; it is played with a metal slide moving crosswise over steel bars along the neck. Cooder had heard a chronicle of Hindustani established music performed by Bhatt and was inspired by his playing and the "eerie lucidity" of the "Mohan veena". Cooder and Bhatt met out of the blue short of what one hour before chronicle started; they extemporized a great part of the set; the collection's liner notes express, "this account was impromptu and unrehearsed". The collection was delivered by Kavichandran Alexander, organizer of Water Lily Acoustics, and Jayant Shah. It was designed by Alexander, and was aced by Kevin Michael Gray and Paul Stubblebine. Cooder and Bhatt are joined by Cooder's fourteen-year-old child Joachim on "dumbek", a Middle Eastern drum, and by Sukhvinder Singh Namdhari on "tabla". 

The cooperation among Cooder and Bhatt is Alexander's first endeavor to record artists of various societies together, one of his objectives when he established the record name. Creator George Plasketes portrayed Bhatt's playing as "exceptionally nuanced" and stated, Cooder performs in an increasingly "free jointed, slip 'n' slide style". As indicated by Gioffre, Cooder and Bhatt use ad lib and "voice-like" expressing, demonstrating melodic exhibitions in an exchanging style and as one. The collection contains four tracks, three of which are credited to Cooder and Bhatt; tracks go in length from around seven-and-a-half minutes to twelve minutes. "Yearning" has a structure like a "raga". Creator Tom Moon said Cooder leads the pack on the psalm "Isa Lei" as Bhatt contributes "expand squiggling asides" and "swooping crashes". In 2011, Bhatt played out "A Meeting by the River" at a music celebration to pay tribute to master Kelucharan Mohapatra. Bhatt said of the melody, "Music has no religion and no topographical or semantic boundary. It talks an all inclusive language. My sythesis – 'A Meeting by the River' – goes for clarifying this." Bhatt has said he considers working with Cooder his "most uncommon" coordinated effort. 

Gioffre composed a positive audit of the collection and called Cooder and Bhatt "real bosses" of their separate instruments. He portrayed the melodic exchange between the artists as "out and out astonishing" and the collection as an uncommon example in which a mix of kinds works. Gioffre likewise expressed, "this collection is wonderfully recorded; each instrument is clear, particular, and three-dimensional sounding. "A Meeting by the River" is an absolute necessity claim, a thing of unadulterated, unadulterated excellence, and the most grounded record in Cooder's broad list." Peter Margasak of the "Chicago Tribune" granted the collection four stars out of four, depicting Cooder's execution as "capturing" and Bhatt's as "unpleasant". Margasak composed that the combination uncovered an "uncommon, frequently supernatural excellence" as the two specialists "tenderly and instinctively" discovered shared conviction. "Moving Stone" called the collection "productive" and granted it three stars out of five. 

"A Meeting by the River" achieved a pinnacle position of number four on "Bulletin" Top World Music Albums diagram. In 1994, the collection earned Cooder and Bhatt Grammy Awards for Best World Music Album. Bhatt ended up one of a couple of Indian artists to have gotten a Grammy Award until A. R. Rahman succeeded at the 52nd Grammy Awards in 2010. Past Indian honor champs had been perceived mutually with Western craftsmen. The February 25, 1995, issue of "Announcement", which highlighted the yearly "Non mainstream players Spotlight" and secured autonomous music between the January 29, 1994, and January 21, 1995, issues of the magazine notwithstanding "A Meeting by the River" at number ten on its rundown of the "Top Indie World Music Albums". The collection is incorporated into Tom Moon's 2008 book "1,000 Recordings to Hear Before You Die: A Listener's Life List". 

All tracks by Ry Cooder and Vishwa Mohan Bhatt except if noted something else. 

Track posting adjusted from Allmusic. 

Credits adjusted from Allmusic.