Dunham Massey 

Dunham Massey is a common ward in the Metropolitan Borough of Trafford, Greater Manchester, England. The ward incorporates the towns of Sinderland Green, Dunham Woodhouses and Dunham Town, alongside Dunham Massey Hall and Park, once the home of the last Earl of Stamford and claimed by the National Trust since 1976. Dunham Massey was verifiably in the region of Cheshire, however since 1974 has been a piece of Trafford Metropolitan Borough; the closest town is Altrincham. At the 2001 statistics, the ward had a populace of 475. 

Dunham Massey's history is reflected in its 45 recorded structures. It was a locally critical spot amid the medieval period, and the seat of the Massey nobles. The Georgian chateau with the remaining parts of a palace on its grounds is a well known vacation spot. There are two Sites of Special Scientific Interest in Dunham Massey: Dunham Park, found south of Dunham Town, and Brookheys Covert. 

The Roman street among Chester and York going between the Dunham Massey and Bowdon shapes the limit between the two. The name Dunham is gotten from the Anglo-Saxon "dun", signifying "slope". The Massey component of the name is an aftereffect of its possession by the Massey family. The estate of Dunham is recorded in the "Domesday Book" of 1086 as having had a place with Aelfward, a Saxon thegn, before the Norman Conquest and to Hamo de Masci a short time later. The Barons de Masci additionally had command over the estates of Baguley, Bowdon, Hale, Partington, and Timperley. The addition of "Massey" to the name Dunham mirrors the house's significance; Dunham was the seat of the Masseys. The significance of Dunham is additionally exemplified by the previous presence of two de Massey manors: Dunham Castle and Watch Hill Castle on the outskirt with Bowdon; a third, Ullerwood Castle, was close Hale. The Masseys remained rulers of Dunham and its environs until the fourteenth century, when the family's male line ended up terminated. The Booth family acquired the vast majority of the Massey family land in 1409, with Dunham Massey staying at the core of the home. 

By the Elizabeth time frame, Dunham Massey Castle had been obliterated. Likely amid the medieval period, Dunham Massey Hall turned into the home of the manorial master, and a focal point of intensity in the zone. The lobby was modified in 1616, leaving no remaining parts of the old medieval villa. A factory at Dunham was archived in 1353, in spite of the fact that the its present structure dates to the 1860s. It lies on the River Bollin, inverse Little Bollington. The main record of Dunham's deer park was additionally in 1353. The settlement at Dunham Woodhouse (named after a distant cabin on the domain) dates from the fifteenth century. Amid the medieval period, the essential wellspring of work was horticulture, primarily arable cultivating. 

The Warrington and Stockport Railway was built through Dunham amid 1853/54. Dunham Massey railroad station served the territory among 1854 and its conclusion in 1962. Dunham developed subsequently, the populace expanding by 57.5% somewhere in the range of 1851 and 1881. Something else, the modern upset had little impact on Dunham Massey, and it remained a transcendently agrarian region. 

The present corridor was worked in 1616 by Sir George Booth, who got one of the principal baronetcies to be made by James I in 1611; it was rebuilt by John Norris for his relative, George, second Earl of Warrington somewhere in the range of 1732 and 1740; it was additionally adjusted by John Hope towards the finish of the eighteenth century and again by Joseph Compton Hall somewhere in the range of 1905 and 1908. The lobby, stables, and the carriage place of Dunham Massey are all Grade I recorded structures, three of six such structures in Trafford. 

The site is moated and lies quickly west of the town of Dunham, with its deer park toward the south. The lobby was given to the National Trust by Roger Gray, tenth and last Earl of Stamford in 1976. The lobby was utilized as a military emergency clinic amid the First World War. Inside is a noteworthy accumulation of Huguenot silver, the cutting "The Crucifixion" by seventeenth century wood carver Grinling Gibbons, and a white marble bust of the Emperor Hadrian; the head is old fashioned, however the neck and shoulders are eighteenth century; it was most likely obtained by the George, Earl of Stamford and Warrington. The lobby's gathering of canvases incorporate "Moral story with Venus, Mars, Cupid and Time" by Guercino; "The Cascade at Terni" by Louis Ducros; and representations by William Beechey, Francis Cotes, Michael Dahl, A. R. Mengs, Sir Joshua Reynolds, George Romney, Enoch Seeman, and Zoffany. George Harry, Earl of Stamford and Warrington evacuated a choice of canvases to Enville Hall in the late-1850s, and it was not until Roger Gray, tenth Earl of Stamford prevailing as Earl, that some were rebought by the family after deals in 1929 and 1931. The deer park is the main enduring medieval park in Trafford or the encompassing territory. The lobby and grounds are available to general society and are a mainstream vacation spot, with 290,000 guests in 2017. 

Dunham Massey was verifiably in the religious ward of Bowdon and the province of Cheshire. 

The common ward of Dunham Massey was made in 1894, under the Local Government Act 1894, and has its very own area committee. Dunham Massey turned out to be a piece of the Metropolitan Borough of Trafford in 1974 upon the ward's creation, yet was already in Bucklow Rural District. The town is a piece of the Bowdon discretionary ward. The Councilors for Bowdon Ward are Sean Anstee, Karen Barclay, and Michael Hyman, all individuals from the Conservative Party. Dunham Massey is additionally a piece of the Altrincham and Sale West voting demographic, and is in the North West England voting demographic for the European Parliament. Since the arrangement of the Altrincham and Sale West supporters in 1997, it has been spoken to in the House of Commons by the Conservative MP, Graham Brady. 

Dunham Massey deceives the east of Warburton, and toward the west of Bowdon, with Altrincham roughly toward the upper east. The scene is transcendently level, with some mossland. Dunham Park possesses of the region. The Roman street running from Chester to York shapes the limit among Dunham and Bowdon. The River Bollin hurries toward the south, with the Bridgewater Canal going through the territory. The neighborhood topography is lower keuper marl, with an edge of sand and rock running from Dunham to Warburton. 

At the 2001 UK statistics, Dunham Massey had a complete populace of 475. For each 100 females, there were 96.3 guys. The normal family unit measure was 2.36. As indicated by the evaluation, 0.01% were jobless and 19.24% were monetarily idle. 17.89% of the populace were younger than 16, and 9.89% were matured 75 and over; the mean age of the occupants of Dunham Massey was 43.71. 75.79% of inhabitants portrayed their wellbeing as 'great'. 

Brookheys Covert 

Brookheys Covert is a Site of Special Scientific Interest in the Dunham Park Estate (). The site is a semi-regular wood comprising for the most part of slag, birch, and rowan, with a wetland natural surroundings and a few marl pits, which have overflowed to shape lakes. The hold ranges and is overseen by the Dunham Massey Estates. Brookheys Covert gives an environment to numerous creatures, including foxes, rabbits, squirrels, and 57 types of flying creature. 

Dunham Park 

Dunham Park covers a zone of and is a piece of the Dunham Park Estate, kept running by the National Trust (). The recreation center is generally "field forest or park-forest" and has been since the Middle Ages. A significant number of the oak trees, which make up the bigger piece of the forest, go back to the seventeenth century. Dunham Park is the main spot in the northwest of England with such a grouping of old trees, and one of just a couple of staying in England, making it a site of national significance. The recreation center backings a scope of creatures, including neglected deer and more than 500 types of creepy crawly. 

Dunham Massey has many evaluation II recorded structures; among the most striking is the eighteenth century sandstone pillar toward the finish of the north vista from Dunham Massey Hall. Custom has it that it denotes the entombment site of a race horse. 

There are many recorded living arrangements in Dunham Massey, most dating from the eighteenth or mid nineteenth century, and many component Flemish bond brickwork and slate rooftops. They include: Dunham Massey Lodge, on Dunham Road; Willow Cottage; numbers 1 and 2 Barns Lane; number 1 Orchard View; The Hollies, on Station Road; numbers 1, 3 and 4 Woodhouse Lane; Big Tree Cottages, on Woodhouse Lane. Agden View, likewise on Woodhouse Lane, dates from 1725 and has both greenery enclosure divider bond and Flemish bond brickwork. Enormous Tree House, on Charcoal Road, dates from the mid-eighteenth century and highlights English bond brickwork. Yew Tree Cottage and Lime Tree Cottage are likewise on Charcoal Lane; the two houses date to the seventeenth century and display garden divider bond brickwork with slate rooftops. Ivy House, on Woodhouse Lane, was worked in the mid eighteenth century. Kitchen Garden house was worked in 1702. Rose Cottage and Farm Cottage are late-eighteenth or mid nineteenth century. The Meadows, on School Lane, was worked in the seventeenth century and highlights garden divider bond brickwork and a covered rooftop. 

The homestead structures of Home Farm, including its dovecote, were worked in the mid nineteenth century, and highlight Flemish bond brickwork. Sinderland House, likewise dating from the mid nineteenth century, is another of Dunham Massey's recorded farmhouses. Estate Farmhouse, on Station Road, was worked by George Booth, second Earl of Warrington; the structure dates from the mid-eighteenth century and highlights both Flemish and patio nursery divider bond brickwork. The farmhouse on Station Road was worked in 1752. The stable on Woodhouse Lane dates from the mid eighteenth century and highlights garden divider bond brickwork, a slate rooftop, and upper cruck outlines. Puppy Farmhouse, likewise on Woodhouse Lane, was worked in the mid nineteenth century; anyway it might have been an adjustment of a prior, conceivably eighteenth century, farmhouse. 

Dunham School was worked in 1759, with increments in 1860 and the twentieth century. Over the entryway is an engraved board perusing "This School was Erected in 1759 For the Benefit of the Township of Dunham Massey. As indicated by the Will of Thomas Walton Gent". The school is presently utilized as the area lobby. The adjacent Dunham School Bridge, over the Bridgewater Canal, was worked in 1776 by John Gilbert, who likewise fabricated the water system for the Bridgewater Canal over the River Bollin, which was opened in 1776. The other recorded extension, Brick Kiln Lane Bridge, was additionally worked in the eighteenth century. Bollington watermill, developed during the 1860s, has an undershot waterwheel. 

There are various recorded structures in the grounds of Dunham Massey Hall, including the 1720 wellhouse that provided water to the corridor until the 1860s, and the mid eighteenth century fancy sundial before the lobby, portraying a dark slave clad in leaves, conveying the sundial over his head. The steady structures, the slaughterhouse, the deer house, the orangery, and an ashlar haven toward the west of the lobby, all date from the seventeenth or eighteenth century. Animal dwellingplace Cottages date from no less than 1751. The bungalows were initially a solitary horse shelter, which was changed over in the nineteenth century. Other evaluation II recorded structures in the grounds of the lobby include: the lakeside divider (eighteenth century); two little docks south of the greenhouse forecourt (eighteenth century); a wharf north west of the patio nursery forecourt (eighteenth century); the entryway inverse the kitchen (1750); the wharfs at the south of forecourt garden finished with lions (eighteenth century); and a monolith raised by George, second Earl of Warrington, in 1714 in memory of his mom. Close to the lobby there is a Grade II* recorded sawmill, presumably implicit 1616.