Jacob L. Beilhart 

Jacob L. Beilhart (March 4, 1867 – November 24, 1908) was the author and pioneer of a communitarian bunch known as the Spirit Fruit Society. Beilhart trusted that envy, realism, and the dread of losing another's affection were at the foundation of a significant part of the sickness on the planet. Under his heading, the Spirit Fruit Society tried to model and practice those convictions. 

Beilhart was conceived in Ohio and brought up in the Lutheran confidence. He moved to Kansas when he was 18 and grasped Seventh-day Adventism. He later gone to school to turn into an authorized evangelist. In the long run, Beilhart came to trust that it was progressively imperative to incorporated confidence helping other people so he left lecturing examination nursing and work in an asylum. He came back to Ohio in 1899 to begin the Spirit Fruit Society, a deliberate network dependent on his encounters, learning, and perspectives. Beilhart drove the gathering for a long time before he kicked the bucket of an infected appendix and peritonitis in 1908. Beilhart's collective made due for an additional 22 years making it one of the longest enduring cooperatives in America. 

Beilhart was conceived March 4, 1867 in Columbiana County, Ohio to a Lutheran dad and a Mennonite mother. The ninth of 11 kids, Beilhart was brought up in the Lutheran church and his initial home condition was carefully religious. Jacob did not get much in the method for formal instruction. His dad passed on when he was six or seven years of age so Jacob went to just grade school. At 17 years old, Beilhart got down to business at his brother by marriage outfit shop in southern Ohio and, when they moved to Ottawa, Kansas, Jacob ran with them. 

Beilhart left his brother by marriage home a year later and went to live and chip away at a sheep ranch. The family he lived with were ardent Seventh Day Adventists. Amid this time, he ended up persuaded that their perspective on the Bible and its lessons were very not the same as what he had been raised to see, however he acknowledged their religion completely. 

In spite of the fact that it isn't known for certain, it is conceivable that the sheep rancher was the dad of Olive Louema Blow, whom Beilhart wedded in 1887. Jacob and Louema went to Healdsburg College in California where Jacob got a permit to lecture. Beilhart came back to Kansas to start a vocation in lecturing. Following two years, notwithstanding, looked with the possibility of being sent to educate in different regions, Beilhart left lecturing. He kept up that he needed to accomplish something "other than talk." Beilhart felt a solid need to support the wiped out so he took on a nursing program at the Battle Creek Sanitarium that was controlled by Dr. John Harvey Kellogg. 

Once, while working at the Sanitarium, Beilhart was called to the bedside of a young lady for whom specialists had surrendered trust. At the point when Beilhart petitioned God for her, she encountered a snappy and complete recuperation. Beilhart's conviction that confidence recuperating was the solution for disease placed him in disapproval with the asylum authorities and he was approached to leave. 

Beilhart progressed toward becoming companions with C. W. Post, who was a patient at the asylum, however Post was mended by a Christian Science confidence healer, Mrs Elizabeth K. Gregory. In 1892, Post began "La Vita Inn", an asylum of his own and brought Beilhart on as a partner. The two men took guidance in Christian Science. Both Post and Beilhart rejected the tenet of the religion yet they grasped the view that disease was a hallucination and could be overwhelmed by mental recommendation, petition, and altruism. 

After the introduction of their little girl, Edith in 1896, Louema uncovered that the dad of both Edith and her more seasoned sibling, Harvey (1893), was C. W. Post. In spite of the fact that Post offered him money related enthusiasm for "La Vita Inn" and his imminent well known breakfast drink, Postum, gave Beilhart he would remain and work at the Inn. Offended at his companion's disloyalty, Beilhart requested Post out of his home and left Battle Creek for Ohio. Louema left Jacob and returned the youngsters to her family in Kansas in 1897. This experience without a doubt had a significant impact upon Beilhart's perspective on marriage. 

In 1896, Beilhart came back to Ohio and settled in Lisbon, near where he had grown up. In 1899 he chose to make a deliberate network so as to rehearse his recently created convictions and to display this training for other people. Beilhart additionally begun two papers called "Soul Fruit" and "Soul Voice" that were circulated broadly by membership. The Spirit Fruit Society was consolidated as a religious association in 1901. The expressed objective in the consolidation archives was to, "show humanity how to apply the realities instructed by Jesus Christ". 

Jacob attempted to request individuals for his cooperative other than through his papers and now and then rejected candidates when he felt they were not fit applicants. The collective pulled in just around twelve inhabitants – for the most part from outside the Ohio zone. 

Beilhart lectured in Chicago and somewhere else, yet was not known to convert firmly; be that as it may, in spite of the fact that the gathering regularly minded their own business, their strange nature prompted confusions and doubt in the press. In 1904, various paper articles and publications were composed, for the most part in Chicago, about the Society. Those articles were regularly dramatist and served to put the Society in an awful light. The perspectives and practices of the Society, especially those against marriage and advancing free love, were not all around acknowledged in the little Ohio people group. In this way, in 1904, the gathering left Lisbon for Chicago where they expected their dynamic thoughts may be better endured. 

Beilhart had lectured in Chicago on various events and felt that the gathering of the Society by that network would be better. Ominous attention pursued the gathering to Chicago be that as it may, and this period kept going just a generally brief time. In 1906 Beilhart bought the 90 section of land "Dalziel Farm" on the shores of Wooster Lake. Inferable from his convictions against individual property, very quickly after the buy he had his name expelled from the deed since he didn't need anything in his name. 

In November 1908, coming back from a gathering in Chicago, Beilhart became sick with stomach torments. He was determined to have a ruptured appendix, and a specialist was acquired. There is some inconsistency concerning the conclusion once medical procedure was performed. One specialist demonstrated that his index was sound while another kept up that it had cracked. Beilhart created peritonitis and kicked the bucket on November 24, 1908. 

As per his convictions, the Society covered Beilhart in a plain grave on the ranch sitting above Wooster Lake. Albeit the greater part of the zone is presently secured by a private advancement, Beilhart's grave site has been safeguarded, encompassed by brush.