Toss Versus the Last Details 

"Toss Versus the Last Details" is the 23rd scene of the fourth period of "Toss", and the 77th generally speaking scene of the arrangement. The scene was composed by Henry Alonso Myers and Kristin Newman, and coordinated by Peter Lauer. It initially broadcast on May 9, 2011. 

In the scene, Chuck Bartowski (Zachary Levi) and Sarah Walker's (Yvonne Strahovski) wedding planning incorporates one last detail: guaranteeing that the mother-of-the-groom, Mary (Linda Hamilton), makes it to the function alive. In the mean time, Morgan Grimes' (Joshua Gomez) obligations as best man incorporate his most risky mission yet, as he faces Vivian Volkoff (Lauren Cohan). Somewhere else, Ellie Woodcomb (Sarah Lancaster) keeps an eye on the last subtleties of the practice supper and looks for assistance from an impossible source. 

"Hurl Versus the Last Details" got commonly positive audits from pundits. As indicated by the Nielsen evaluations framework, it drew 4.1 million watchers, the third-most reduced number in "Toss" history, after "Toss Versus the Family Volkoff" and "Hurl Versus Agent X". It had a 2.4/4 share among all family units and 1.4/4 share among those matured 18–49. 

Mary Elizabeth Bartowski (Linda Hamilton) sneaks into a mine in Amacayacu, Colombia to recover the completely gathered "Norseman" weapon, just to be caught by Vivian Volkoff (Lauren Cohan) and Riley (Ray Wise). To guarantee that Mary is at his wedding, Chuck Bartowski (Zachary Levi) goes to the mine and safeguards Mary, leaving best man Morgan Grimes (Joshua Gomez) responsible for making a video montage as his wedding present to Sarah Walker (Yvonne Strahovski). Morgan permits Jeff Barnes (Scott Krinsky), Lester Patel (Vik Sahay), and Big Mike (Mark Christopher Lawrence) to make the principal cut with the goal that he can share in the mission, however John Casey (Adam Baldwin) powers Morgan to remain in Burbank due to Alex McHugh's (Mekenna Melvin) stress for his wellbeing. 

Afterward, Morgan is doled out to invade the gathering where Vivian expects to sell the Norseman, acting like an as of late caught criminal he intently looks like. At the gathering, Riley utilizes the Norseman to murder every one of the purchasers, disposing of all "rivalry" to Volkoff Industries. Since the Norseman was sensitive to the DNA of the purchaser Morgan was mimicking, instead of Morgan himself, Morgan professes to be dead and can escape safe, however the group is compelled to defy Riley and Vivian, who trusts Chuck to be "Specialist X". Toss at that point uncovers reality that Vivian's dad Alexei Volkoff was Agent X. Riley bends the data to additionally control and shape Vivian, just to be shot and slaughtered by Sarah. Vivian, be that as it may, figures out how to get away. 

At Chuck and Sarah's practice supper, Morgan reveals to Alex that he will quit going on missions and just become an investigator. Toss' sister Ellie (Sarah Lancaster) is unfit to make her own video montage, having reviewed and dismissed Lester's profoundly aggravated initially cut. Be that as it may, Jeff offers his very own impeccable cut of the montage, being compensated with a kiss from Ellie. Amid the video, Chuck gets a telephone call from Vivian, who plans to influence him to endure. Vivian initiates the Norseman gadget on an objective at the supper, who Chuck at first feelings of dread is his mom. All of a sudden, Sarah's nose begins to drain and she crumples in Chuck's arms as he gets out for help. 

"Hurl Versus the Last Details" was coordinated by Peter Lauer, in view of a content by Henry Alonso Myers and Kristin Newman. The scene initially circulated in the United States on May 9, 2011, on NBC as the 23rd scene of "Throw" fourth season and the 77th scene generally. 

Zap2it affirmed in April 2011 that Linda Hamilton, Lauren Cohan, Mekenna Melvin, and Ray Wise would repeat their repetitive jobs of Mary Elizabeth Bartowski, Vivian Volkoff, Alex McHugh, and Riley, separately. Michael Bailey Smith additionally visitor featured as a Volkoff security watch, Vlad. 

Arrangement co-maker Chris Fedak uncovered at the 2011 Chicago Comic and Entertainment Expo that the arrangement would concentrate less on the band Jeffster! than on Jeff and Lester's "other fixation" as beginner movie producers, saying that the "two youthful "au-teurs" will "mama ture" directly before [the audience]." 

Different references are made to the "Star Wars" adventure all through the scene. Throw straightforwardly looks at their endeavoring to sneak in to Vivian's base to a similar strategy utilized by Luke Skywalker and Han Solo to safeguard Princess Leia in the first film, by alluding to the bound Casey as "Chewie." During a similar scene Casey mumbles "I have an awful inclination about this," a catchphrase utilized by characters all through the film arrangement. The arrangement is twice referenced straightforwardly, by Chuck when Sarah neglects to comprehend his "Chewie" reference, and by Casey, who says, "This is the thing that happens when you draw your arrangements from "Star Wars"." Chuck and Morgan additionally utilize "The Imperial March" as a way to plan Morgan for his main goal to act like a reprobate while penetrating a gathering with Vivian. 

The scene contains various different references. Sarah remarks that she has "at last" watched "Mannequin". Mary is later indicated doing pull-ups from her bed outline in her jail cell, referencing the film "", where Sarah Connor (likewise depicted by Hamilton) did likewise. While rehearsing his Italian pronunciation, Morgan cites computer game character Mario's catchphrase "It's me, Mario!" Morgan later remarks that cans of corrosive will be utilized similarly as on "Breaking Bad", prescribing the arrangement to Casey. 

"Toss Versus the Last Details" got the third-least watchers of any scene in the season. As indicated by the Nielsen appraisals framework, it drew 4.099 million watchers, higher just than "Toss Versus the Family Volkoff" and "Toss Versus Agent X". The scene had a 2.4/4 share among all family units and 1.4/4 share among those matured 18–49. 

The scene got positive surveys from pundits. HitFix Senior Editor Alan Sepinwall expressed, "It was definitely not an ideal scene, for the most part in light of the fact that Vivian remains a genuinely jumbled, bratty reprobate, and in light of the fact that I don't feel like the show at any point truly utilized Ray Wise to his maximum capacity. In any case, such a large amount of it was so fulfilling, both sincerely and comedically, that, until Vivian called Chuck amid the practice supper, I really contemplated internally, 'You know, this would be an entirely damn great finale all by itself. Ryan McGee of "The A.V. Club" evaluated the scene a B on an A+ to F scale. McGee expressed, "The last demonstration was genuinely wonderful, however we needed to traverse a great deal of upsetting material so as to accomplish genuine liftoff on the hour. With such huge numbers of last details to wrap up, the hour felt overstuffed: the looming wedding, The Norseman, Agent X, Morgan's first field assignment...I mean, that is a ton of stuff. What's more, it doesn't help that Vivian Volkoff is at the focal point of three of those things, and embedded herself into the fourth at last. Also, in pondering the awkwardness of parts of this scene, I contemplated the awkwardness of this last 50% of the period all in all." Eric Goldman of IGN gave this scene a score of 8.5 out of 10, composing that it was an error not to incorporate Timothy Dalton as Alexei Volkoff after the plot bits of the past scene. Sarah Stegall of SFScope composed, ""Chuck" is slaughtering me by inches. So close, so near the Chuck/Sarah wedding, however things prop up off-base."