The Albums 2000–2010 

The Albums 2000–2010 is a case set by Australian chronicle craftsman Kylie Minogue. It was discharged by Parlophone Records on 12 July 2011. The five-plate confine set was discharged Europe, and Australasia, and incorporated the majority of Minogue's studio collections from the years 2000 to 2010; "Light Years" (2000), "Fever" (2001), "Non-verbal communication" (2003), "X" (2007), and "Aphrodite" (2010). The spread sleeve for the collection comprised of pieces from the first works of art embedded into Minogue's outline from her spread for "Fever" (2001). "The Albums 2000–2010" denoted Minogue's first box set accumulation until her October 2012 discharge, "K25: Time Capsule". 

Upon its discharge, "The Albums 2000-2010" got positive gathering from the majority of the analysts, who complimented the general bundling of the container set and her discharges through Parlophone. A portion of the faultfinders were unmoved with the rejection of her work from the PWL and Deconstruction period. The container set outlined on the UK Albums Chart at number 37, and on the Scottish Albums Chart at number 40. 

It was first reported on Minogue's authentic site in May 2011 that EMI would discharge a five-CD box set. The set incorporates each past studio collection Minogue had discharged from 2000 up until 2010; the first forms of "Light Years" (2000), "Fever" (2001), "Non-verbal communication" (2003), "X" (2007), and "Aphrodite" (2010), with each circle housed in a cardboard sleeve. The cardboard sleeves contain the first collection craftsmanship and one picture from every collection photograph shoot engraved inside the cardboard sleeve, without the collection or Minogue's logo engraved. Each case set highlights a 15" x 10" blurb that includes the credits and collection fine arts of the first collections. Inside the container, every one of the collections speak to a noteworthy shading to which is shows on the front: "Light Years" is light blue, "Fever" is white, "Non-verbal communication" is dark, "X" is red, and "Aphrodite" is naval force blue. 

It was her first most prominent hits box set to be discharged; in October 2012, to recognize her twenty-fifth year in music business, she discharged her second, all-singles box set, "K25: Time Capsule". 

"The Albums 2000–2010" got positive surveys from generally analysts. An essayist from "The Sun" granted the container set an ideal five star rating, expressing "Whether you like hot-gasp Kylie, non mainstream Kylie, young lady nearby Kylie or dull Kylie, there's something for each Kylie fan in this unique box-set. Comprised of five collections and commending ten years of tunes, we challenge you to get them out of your head." Scott Harrah from Stagezine granted the collection four-and-a-half stars out of five, yet did not audit the crate set; rather, he investigated every collection separately in light of the fact that "all [albums] are so unique in both sound and idea." Jon O'Brien from AllMusic granted the collection three-and-a-half stars, naming her prior work as "irresistible". In spite of being basic towards the absence of consideration of her 1994–1998 Deconstruction work, and the incorporation of her collections, "X", and "Aphrodite", he finished up "Kylie presently can't seem to make that one fundamental collection, and the making an insincere effort nature of her later discharges proposes her time may have passed, however this case set still contains a lot of minutes to legitimize her situation as one of the unequaled chief pop princesses." 

Writing by and large for "Every day Express", commentator Simon Gage was condemning of Minogue's absence of melodic movement, allure, and believed that she came up short on an "incredible voice". He expressed "There are dodgy tracks and the “voice”, more prepared than a tinned pea, starts to grind however it's still quite great." He granted the case set three stars. English columnist Paul Du Noyer audited the crate set, and complimented Minogue's Parlophone fill in as "vague pop". In any case, he expressed "There’s a great deal of yearning fly in here, yet no theoretical overextend. Not in any case her experience of bosom malignancy was permitted to surface in Kylie’s ensuing material: melodiously, it was straight back to business. It appears to be impossible such a 20-year fortunate streak could be continued without a great deal of keen choices by Minogue herself. So it appears that everybody is directly all things considered: Kylie is A Good Thing, and here is sufficiently only of it." 

In the United Kingdom, the container set appeared at number thirty-seven on the UK Albums Chart, turning into Minogue's nineteenth collection passage since her presentation collection, "Kylie" (1987). The case set remained in for multi week on the main 100 outline. "The Albums 2000-2010" likewise appeared at number forty on the Scottish Albums Chart for a sole week.