Jason Dozzell 

Jason Irvin Winans Dozzell (brought into the world 9 December 1967) is an English previous expert footballer who made in excess of 500 Football League appearances for Ipswich Town, Tottenham Hotspur, Northampton Town and Colchester United. Dozzell holds the record for being the most youthful goalscorer in England's top division in the wake of scoring for Ipswich Town against Coventry City in a First Division coordinate on 4 February 1984 at 16 years old years and 57 days (the most youthful goalscorer since the development of the Premier League is Everton's James Vaughan, matured 16 years 270 days). His child Andre additionally scored on his Ipswich debut matured 16. 

Dozzell has additionally overseen two non-League football clubs, both in the Eastern Counties Football League — Ipswich Wanderers and Leiston. As of October 2008, he isn't dealing with a club. 

Conceived in Ipswich, Suffolk, in 1967, Dozzell went to the nearby Chantry High School. He has bolstered neighborhood foundations, including going about as a benefactor for ""Operation Santa Claus"", keep running related to radio station SGR-FM. He played for a "Town Legends" side against a Soccer AM group in 2005 to fund-raise for the Academy, where his child, Andre, was in the under-10s group. In 2007, he was discovered blameworthy of driving with abundance liquor and was prohibited for a long time. 

Playing football for the Langham Lions in the Colchester Youth League, Dozzell was noted as a "productive student scorer", and was marked on student terms for Ipswich Town by Bobby Robson in spite of enthusiasm from West Ham United and Nottingham Forest. Chosen for the senior squad by administrator Bobby Ferguson, Dozzell made his presentation for Ipswich Town in February 1984, going ahead as a substitute against Coventry City. Ipswich won the match 3–1; Dozzell scored late in the second half, turning into the most youthful player, at 16 years and 57 days, to score in the early English Football League First Division. He proceeded to show up in the 1983–84 season. The accompanying season Dozzell showed up, five of them from the seat, and scored four objectives. In the 1985–86 season he turned into an ordinary starter for Ipswich, scoring five objectives in 51 recreations, in spite of the fact that the club were consigned to the Football League Second Division. His 1986–87 season saw him play in each diversion, making 42 group and 11 container appearances and scoring a solitary objective. He was additionally chosen for the England under-21 group, for whom he played multiple times without scoring. 

In the 1988–89 season, Dozzell completed as the club's joint top-scorer (with John Wark and Dalian Atkinson), scoring 13 objectives from 37 appearances. The accompanying two seasons considered Dozzell to be a standard starter for the group, with 18 objectives from 88 appearances. His 16 objectives in the 1991–92 season helped John Lyall's Ipswich win the class title and secure advancement to the recently shaped Premier League. He highlighted consistently the accompanying season, scoring nine objectives in 52 diversions and helping the club fight off transfer in their first season back in the top level of English football. 

In August 1993, Dozzell was sold to Tottenham Hotspur for ³1.9 million; in his first season, he showed up and scored ten objectives over all rivalries. Dozzell endured various wounds amid his time at White Hart Lane, limiting the quantity of recreations in which he played. In the 1994–95 season, he oversaw only eight appearances with one objective. He made an aggregate of 89 association and container appearances and scored 14 objectives over his four seasons at the club. Dozzell made a concise come back to Portman Road in 1997, on credit for a month, and showed up before marking for Northampton Town in 1997. A season with The Cobblers saw him score four objectives from 26 appearances and help the club to the play-off last at Wembley Stadium. This was trailed by a move to recently advanced Colchester United, at first on a month to month contract, where Dozzell showed up and scored 11 objectives more than three seasons. 

Dozzell resigned from expert football in 2001 because of constant wounds, specifically a progressing toe issue. Be that as it may, he kept playing with non-association clubs; a short spell with Canvey Island rejoined him with previous Colchester and Ipswich player Neil Gregory. Canvey Island discharged him and he proceeded onward to a significantly shorter remain with Grays Athletic, who marked him close by Carl Leaburn. This was trailed by a move back to Ipswich and into the executives. 

Dozzell ventured out administration with Eastern Counties Football League club Ipswich Wanderers in 2003. In his job as player-chief, he moved to play in safeguard and verified an eighth-place complete in the class amid his first season with the club. The accompanying season, he drove them to the class title and advancement toward the Eastern Counties League Premier Division. The 2005–06 season saw Dozzell lead the recently elevated club to seventh in the class, however regardless of closure the season with a record count of focuses, he left the Wanderers, refering to off-pitch issues at the club. 

Dozzell proceeded to oversee Leiston, however he left in November 2007.