Homer Alone 

"Homer Alone" is the fifteenth scene of "The Simpsons"<nowiki>'</nowiki> third season and the fiftieth in general. It initially broadcast on the Fox organize in the United States on February 6, 1992. In the scene, worry from doing housework and being overlooked at home makes Marge have a psychological breakdown and she chooses to go on a get-away. She leaves for a spa called Rancho Relaxo, putting Bart and Lisa into the consideration of her sisters Patty and Selma and leaving Maggie at home with Homer. 

The scene was composed by David M. Stern and coordinated by Mark Kirkland. Stern had seen that the majority of the journalists were pitching tales about Bart and Homer, and he thought a "more profound vein of satire" could be come to by having Marge experience the ill effects of a mental meltdown. Initially, Marge's outing was to a troubled mother's organization as opposed to a spa. In any case, the plot was not generally welcomed at the table read for the scene and a lot of it was re-composed. The scene's title references the film "Home Alone", which featured David Stern's sibling Daniel. 

"Homer Alone" contains references to the Wile E. Coyote and Road Runner kid's shows, "Thelma and Louise", "Home Alone", "MacGyver", and the melody "Child Come Back" by Player. The scene has gotten commonly positive surveys from commentators. Amid its unique airing on the Fox arrange amid February clears, it obtained a 14.2 Nielsen rating. 

At some point, Marge winds up worried from the majority of the errands she accomplishes for her family. The day is especially unpleasant as she should run a few errands. While driving over an extension, she tunes in to the radio and hears the DJs Bill and Marty make a savage trick call to a man. She all of a sudden snaps after Maggie incidentally blasts open her container and floods the vehicle with milk and stops her vehicle amidst the scaffold, blocking traffic. The police attempt to persuade her to move her vehicle, without much of any result. At last, Homer arrives and persuades her to escape the vehicle, and she is quickly captured by the police. Numerous ladies identify with Marge's situation, and Mayor Quimby, planning to pick up ubiquity, arranges her discharge. 

That night, Marge chooses to loosen up by getting away to a spa called Rancho Relaxo. She goes alone, putting Bart and Lisa into the consideration of her sisters Patty and Selma and leaving Maggie at home with Homer. Marge makes the most of her genuinely necessary rest while the remainder of the family experience issues adjusting to existence without her. Homer finds that he is desolate, and not skilled at dealing with Maggie. Bart and Lisa experience considerable difficulties changing in accordance with existence with their aunties. 

Maggie, upset about her mom's nonattendance, advances out of the house searching for Marge and disappears. After a long pursuit by Homer and Barney, Homer calls a child seek hotline. In the interim, Marge has done all that she needed to do in her get-away and calls Homer to disclose to him she is returning and he should get her at the train station. Maggie is found on the edge of the highest point of a dessert shop and is come back to Homer without a moment to spare for Marge's entry. That night, Marge tells Homer and the children, who are for the most part dozing by her, that she might want more help around the house; they guarantee her she has nothing to stress over. 

"Homer Alone" was composed by David M. Stern. He had seen that the majority of the essayists were pitching tales about Bart and Homer, and he thought a "more profound vein of satire" could be come to by having Marge experience the ill effects of a mental meltdown. Official maker James L. Creeks quickly affirmed the thought. Initially, Marge's outing was to an upset mother's establishment so they could indicate "what really mattered to Marge." However, the plot was not generally welcomed at the table read for the scene. 

The authors then re-composed a significant part of the scene, changing the organization to a spa. They additionally included a video appearance from the anecdotal performing artist Troy McClure, voiced by Phil Hartman. As per official maker Al Jean, the journalists frequently utilized McClure as an "alarm catch" when they felt a scene required more funniness. The scene's title is a play on the 1990 film "Home Alone"; David Stern's sibling Daniel had featured in the motion picture as one of the fundamental opponents. 

The scene was coordinated by Mark Kirkland. The scene at the train station where Marge leaves for Rancho Relaxo incorporates a short appearance of a character demonstrated after "Simpsons" executive Jim Reardon. Reardon loathes flying, and took trains at whatever point conceivable, so the illustrators constantly endeavored to incorporate him in scenes at a train station. Susie Dietter filled in as partner chief for the scene and vivified a few of the scenes for the subplot with Bart, Lisa, Patty and Selma. In a scene where Homer sings a melody to Maggie, he was intended to look tousled in light of the fact that the essayists had needed him to look flushed, albeit no consideration was called to it. 

The start of the scene where Homer pursues Bart is a reference to the Warner Bros./Chuck Jones Wile E. Coyote and Road Runner kid's shows. The scene solidifies, amid which Bart and Homer's logical names are given as Brat'us Don'thaveacow'us and Homo Neanderthal'us separately. The foundation in the arrangement references the Hanna–Barbera custom of utilizing foundations again and again and making it look like there is an "interminable parlor". The scene where Marge is reserved in jail references the Coen siblings film "Raising Arizona". 

The melody that plays while Homer is on hang on the missing youngster hotline is "Child Come Back" by Player. One of the movies accessible at Rancho Relaxo is "Thelma and Louise", which Marge winds up viewing. "Homer Alone" is the main scene of "The Simpsons" that indicates Patty and Selma's affection for "MacGyver", and Selma says "Richard Dean Anderson will be in my fantasies today around evening time." 

In its unique airing on February 6, 1992 on the Fox organize amid February clears, the scene obtained a 14.2 Nielsen rating and was seen in roughly 13.08 million homes. It completed 25th in the evaluations for the seven day stretch of February 3–9, 1992, up from the season's normal position of 37th. "The Simpsons" was the most astounding appraised appear on Fox that week. 

Since airing, the scene has gotten commonly positive surveys from pundits. The writers of the book "I Can't Believe It's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide", Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood, stated, "After the initial couple of minutes, this scene turns out to be less about Marge than the family's dependence on her. Bart and Lisa's unbearable time at Patty and Selma's is magnificent ..., however it's Homer losing Maggie, and working out what to tell Marge upon her arrival, that gives the best jokes." DVD Movie Guide's Colin Jacobson felt that the scene "verges on finding the arrangement stuck, as it kind of offers another emphasis of the 'Homer's a terrible dad' topic. Be that as it may, the accentuation on Marge's issues makes it extraordinary, and it's likewise enjoyable to see life at Patty and Selma's place. It's another strong show." 

Nate Meyers of Digitally Obsessed gave the scene 3/5, expressing, "The scene serves just to show what is as of now self-evident: that Marge holds the family together. It's engaging to see Homer battle with the most fundamental of child rearing abilities, however this occurs to the detriment of the various scenes this season show him to be a decent dad (yet imperfect). All things considered, it's pleasant to see Marge get her own show."