12 Songs of Christmas (Etta James collection) 

12 Songs of Christmas is an occasion collection by American vocalist Etta James, discharged in October 1998 through the record name Private Music. The collection, created by John Snyder, highlights gauges orchestrated for the most part by piano player Cedar Walton and performances by Walton, George Bohanon on trombone and Red Holloway on tenor saxophone. Basic gathering of the collection was certain by and large. Following its discharge, "12 Songs" achieved a pinnacle position of number five on "Board" Top Blues Albums diagram. 

"12 Songs of Christmas" comprises of twelve standard occasion tunes with courses of action generally by piano player Cedar Walton and performances by Walton, George Bohanon on trombone and Red Holloway on tenor saxophone. The collection consolidates James' blues style with a jazz sound. "12 Songs", recorded amid May and June 1998, was created by John Snyder with Lupe DeLeon filling in as official maker. 

The collection opens with "Winter Wonderland", initially by Felix Bernard and Richard B. Smith, trailed by James Pierpont's "Signal Bells". A "soul-filled" version of Lou Baxter and Johnny Moore's "Happy Christmas, Baby" trails "This Time of Year" (Hollis, Owens). Other occasion measures showing up on the collection include: "Have Yourself a Merry Little Christmas" (Ralph Blane, Hugh Martin), John Frederick Coots and Haven Gillespie's "Santa Clause Claus Is Coming to Town", and "White Christmas", initially by Irving Berlin. "The Christmas Song (Chestnuts Roasting on an Open Fire)", initially by Mel Tormăš and Robert Wells, "The Little Drummer Boy (Carol of the Drum)" (Katherine Kennicott Davis, Henry Onorati, Harry Simeone), Franz Xaver Gruber and Joseph Mohr's "Quiet Night", and "Bliss to the World" (George Frideric Handel, Lowell Mason, Isaac Watts) pursue. The collection closes with an interpretation of Adolphe Adam and John Sullivan Dwight's "O Holy Night". 

Basic gathering of the collection was certain by and large. Jon Pareles of "The New York Times" composed a positive audit of the collection, asserting that James transformed principles into "smooth nightfall jazz courses of action" that appeared "comfortable and personal". He composed that James was "shockingly respectful" and sounded "out and out ardent" on "Delight to the World". "Stimulation Weekly" Matt Diehl felt that James' exhibitions brought both "backtalk and class" and "ooze[d] enthusiastically with old fashioned soul". David Hinckley of New York City's "Every day News" granted "12 Songs" "more than two chimes" out of four. "Moving Stone" called "12 Songs" a "visit de power of interpretive reexamining" with "sparkling, soul-filled twists on Yuletide evergreens". The "Spartanburg Herald-Journal" Dan DeLuca likewise complimented the set. 

The collection got some negative analysis. Larry Nager of "The Cincinnati Enquirer" granted the collection two out of four stars and composed that James had the capacity to make "a definitive blue Christmas circle" however neglected to do as such. Nager complimented "Happy Christmas, Baby" yet believed the execution to be an "uncommon piece of juke joint" among "dinner club sounds" that left him "needing more". 

Credits adjusted from Allmusic. 

Following its discharge, "12 Songs of Christmas" achieved a pinnacle position of number five on "Board" Top Blues Albums diagram. In 1999, James had five collections diagram in the United States: "Life, Love and the Blues", "12 Songs of Christmas", "Heart of a Woman" (1999), just as two aggregation collections "Best of Etta James" and "Her Best" (1997).