Marasmius funalis 

Marasmius funalis is a types of Marasmiaceae organism known just from Japan. The species delivers little mushrooms with rosy darker tops up to in distance across and dim darker, threadlike stems of up to long. The species has various particular infinitesimal highlights, including exceptionally long cystidia on the stem, unmistakable as fibers. Depicted in 2002 by Haruki Takahashi, the species develops on dead wood. The nearest relative of "M.â funalis" is "M.â liquidambari", known from Mexico and Papua New Guinea, and it is likewise comparable in appearance to "M.â hudonii" and "Setulipes funaliformis", the last of which was named after "M.â funalis". 

"Marasmius funalis" was first portrayed and named in a 2002 article in "Mycoscience" by Haruki Takahashi, in light of examples gathered in 2000. The particular name, "funalis", is Latin for "rope-like", and is in reference to the shape and character of the stem. Inside the family "Marasmius", the species has qualities that recommend that it has a place in the segment "Androsacei", and, inside the segment, it appears to be most firmly identified with "M.â liquidambari". The Japanese basic name for the species is . 

"Marasmius funalis" produces natural product bodies as mushrooms. Each mushroom has an arched (some of the time totally hemispherical) top of between in breadth. In contrast to the tops of different mushrooms, it doesn't change shape to a compliment arched with age. The top is genuinely smooth, however can have little, parallel wrinkles towards the edge, which are masterminded radially. The shading contrasts somewhat, contingent upon the age of the mushroom. While more youthful examples sport ruddy dark colored tops, they are a paler darker in more seasoned mushrooms. The top's surface is dry and dull, and free from hair. The threadlike stem connects midway to the top, measures from long by thick. It is tube shaped, however may decrease somewhat, and is shrouded to put it plainly, white hairs. The base of the stem enters the substrate, and there are no rhizomorphs noticeable. Most of the stem is blackish-dark colored, however it is a lighter darker at the exceptionally top. 

The white gills can be adnate or adnexed; that is, they can be appended to the stem by their entire profundity, or just piece of it. The individual gills are indirectly divided, with somewhere in the range of 8 and 12 achieving the stem. Every gill is up to thick, and the edges are even. There are now and then lamellulae (short gills that don't achieve the top). There is a flimsy layer, up to thick, of whitish tissue in the top. It is intense, yet it tends to be bowed without breaking. The tissue has no smell or taste. 

"Marasmius funalis" mushrooms leave a white spore print. The individual basidiospores are ellipsoidal, and measure 6.5 to 8 by 4 to 5â micrometres (Îźm). They have slender cell dividers, and they are smooth and lackluster. The spores are inamyloid, implying that they don't recolor when they come into contact with iodine from Melzer's reagent or Lugol's answer. The spores are borne on club-formed basidia estimating 20 to 25 by 4.5 to 7â îźm, with two spores for each basidium. There are additionally club-molded basidioles (immature basidia). 

The edge of the gill is clean, comprised of a mass of cystidia (cheilocystidia). The club-molded cheilocystidia measure from 10 to 25 by 7 to 12â îźm, and sport different barrel shaped limbs on their tips, estimating 1 to 7 by 1 to 1.5â îźm. The cheilocystidia are lackluster, with cell dividers of variable thickness, and are inamyloid. There are no pleurocystidia (cystidia on the essence of the gills). The caulocystidia (cystidia in the stem) measure 60 to 200 by 4 to 7â âľm. They are round and hollow and erect, shaping the noticeable fibers. The tip is either pointed or adjusted, and the cell dividers are smooth and dreary, up to 2â âľm thick. They are dextrinoid, which means they recolor a ruddy dark colored when they come into contact with iodine from Melzer's reagent or Lugol's answer. 

The pileipellis, the top layer of hyphae in the top, is a cutis. The cutis is comprised of barrel shaped hyphae somewhere in the range of 2 and 5â âľm thick. The inamyloid and dainty walled hyphae are canvassed in dark colored granules. The substance in the top is comprised of tube shaped hyphae from 4 to 7â âľm wide with dainty cell dividers. They are for the most part generative hyphae, and run parallel to each other. They can be either inamyloid or just pitifully dextrinoid. The tissue in the gills is fundamentally equivalent to the substance in the top, yet for the way that it is totally inamyloid. The hyphae of the stipitipellis, the highest layer in the stem, likewise structure a cutis. The round and hollow hyphae making up the cutis run parallel to each other, and measure from 2.5 to 4.5â âľm in width, with dividers up to 1â âľm thick. They are encrusted with a darker shade, and are dextrinoid. The tissue of the stem is comprised of generative hyphae running lengthways (that is, here and there the stem). The cells are 5 to 8â âľm wide, and are smooth and drab; the cell dividers up to 1â âľm thick. They are dextrinoid. All "M.â funalis" hyphae need brace associations. 

"Marasmius funalis" contrasts from its nearest relative, "M.â liquidambari", because of the nearness of cheilocystidia, the absence of cinch associations and the way that the caulocystidia of "M.â liquidambari" don't frame bristles; rather, they are club formed to tube shaped. The species is known from Mexico and Papua New Guinea. "M.â hudonii", known from Europe, is comparable in appearance to "M.â funalis". In any case, the previous has a top canvassed in hairs or fibers, and contrasts infinitesimally; for example, the hyphae highlight clasp associations. The Malagasy species "Setulipes funaliformis" was named after "M.â funalis" because of the morphological likenesses between the two. The species can be separated by the way that the basidiospores of "S.â funalformis" are somewhat bigger and smaller, estimating from 7 to 10 by 3.5 to 4.5â îźm, and the caulocystidia of "M.â funalis" are fundamentally more. 

"Marasmius funalis" is known just from Kawasaki, Kanagawa and Machida, Tokyo, Japan. Mushrooms develop in gatherings on dead plant matter, and have been recorded on Japanese cedar ("Cryptomeria japonica") wood and leaf litter in forest for the most part made up of Chonowski's hornbeam ("Carpinus tschonoskii") and bamboo-leaf oak ("Quercus myrsinifolia"). The mushrooms can be experienced from May to July.