ScienTOMogy 

ScienTOMogy was a New Zealand-based farce site parodying on-screen character Tom Cruise's contribution with Scientology. At first facilitated at the space name scientomogy.info, the site was made in 2005 in light of the broad media attention encompassing Cruise's appearances on "The Oprah Winfrey Show" and "The Today Show". 

ScienTOMogy picked up press consideration after the site owner was reached by the Church of Scientology with a quit it letter, asserting copyright encroachment by guaranteeing "Scientomogy" was excessively near "Scientology." The owner at first consented to yield to the Church's requests, however then chose to keep the site in the wake of counseling with lawyers. Web traffic to the webpage later expanded significantly because of the media consideration encompassing the Church of Scientology's charges of copyright encroachment. 

New Zealand website admin Glen Stollery made scientomogy.info in July 2005, after Tom Cruise showed up on "The Today Show" in a meeting talking about "the perils of physician endorsed medications," and following the episode where he hopped the love seat over his adoration for Katie Holmes amid a meeting on "The Oprah Winfrey Show". The site's expressed objective was "uncovering Tom Cruise's dumb conduct in his steady campaign to advance the Church of Scientology." 

The site was mostly used to store spoof and parody material, including portrayals of Cruise and Holmes in straitjackets, just as a video indicating Cruise shooting lightning at Oprah Winfrey. To clear up its situation as a farce site, ScienTOMogy contained a disclaimer, which it mentioned that the peruser "comprehend and concur to..before proceeding." The site's disclaimer expressed: "Clearly www.scienTOMogy.info has ABSOLUTELY NO association at all with the Church of Scientology, it’s [sic] partnered associations or, obviously, Tom Cruise. It is intended for discourse and analysis inside the breaking points of Free Speech. All substance ought to be treated as conclusion and all trademarks/copyrighted material thus are possessed by their particular trademark proprietors. The Scientology site is here. Much obliged to you. You may proceed.." On the site, a phony Cruise guarantees that the Church of Scientology ought to allude to itself as "ScienTOMogy" rather than Scientology, so as to clear up advertising issues. The satire adaptation of Cruise expresses "It's sort of like the word sticky bears. Bears independent from anyone else are unnerving, however on the off chance that you simply add the word sticky to it, it currently turns into a fun, agreeable treat." 

The Web webpage drew media consideration when the Church of Scientology's lawyers Moxon and Kobrin reached Stollery, guaranteeing the ScienTOMogy area name was an encroachment of their trademark, regardless of being an alternate word by one letter. In September 2005, the Church of Scientology issued a restraining request to Stollery requesting he shut down the site and exchange possession to the Church, undermining him with a $100,000 claim. The Church's law office expressed that "ScienTOMogy" would cause a probability of disarray with "Scientology," abusing the Lanham Act, 15 U.S.C. 1125(a). The Church of Scientology's letter expressed: "You are thus on notice that the enrollment and utilization of this space name in this style has made your name be dishonestly connected with our client’s enlisted mark, SCIENTOLOGY..The actuality that you have transformed one letter..does not shield you from trademark encroachment." Helena Kobrin, a legal advisor for the Church of Scientology, was cited as saying: "You can't utilize someone's trademark, paying little mind to what you're stating, on the off chance that you haven't been given authorization." 

The site reacted with an announcement: "The site is simply humorous and is for stimulation. It contains no reality nor cases to do as such. The site plainly states in its header, 'This site has definitely no association at all with the Church of Scientology, it's partnered associations or, obviously, Tom Cruise'." Stollery initially yielded and consented to change the space name to "passionofcruise.info" on October 13, 2005, which "E! News" took to be a farce of the film "The Passion of the Christ". 

In the wake of counseling with his attorneys in October 2005, Stollery reacted to the Church with an unquestionably progressively forceful position. Presently trusting the allegation to be totally pointless, Stollery openly won't, testing the Church with: "I'm keeping my area, see you in court." Again in a meeting with "ONE News", Stollery repeated that he would hold rights to "ScienTOMogy", and not exchange the URL to the Church of Scientology, as they had mentioned. After the media consideration, Stollery said he started to get "irritating calls" from neighborhood Scientologists. "The initial couple of I was sufficiently inept to reply, however at this point they simply call and call and call. When I spoke to 'a congregation part here in Auckland' he continued demanding again and again that we meet to discuss my 'grudge' with the congregation." 

The dangers gave the Web webpage its very own faction following, taking its ordinary traffic from one hundred hits for each day to one million of every merely hours. "The Wall Street Journal" conveyed reports remarking on the incongruity of the circumstance, taking note of the site's message that the press presentation because of the dangers from the Church of Scientology had expanded its traffic over ten times. Mel Gibson has not raised protests to utilization of the spoof term "PassionofCruise". "E! News" detailed that however Stollery had initially consented to bring down the site, it was all the while running and open starting at July 2006, when the United Nations' World Intellectual Property Organization granted Cruise rights to the space name "TomCruise.com" over cases of a cybersquatter. 

Notwithstanding facilitating the first stop this instant letter, the Berkman Center for Internet and Society likewise gives lawful critique on different issues relating to the "ScienTOMogy" debate at a page given by the association Chilling Effects. They talk about "trademark tarnishment", which may happen if a non-proprietor of a trademark utilizes the work in an "action that is probably going to outrage the normal individual." However, the page additionally takes note of that the tarnishment would be non-noteworthy if the use was non-business or farce. The Church of Scientology has not since recorded a claim or opened prosecution on "Scientomogy," and the site scientomogy.info never again exists aside from in files.