The Boys (Girls' Generation tune) 

"The Boys" is a tune recorded by South Korean young lady bunch Girls' Generation for their third Korean language studio collection with a similar name. It was delivered by Teddy Riley, Teasung Kim, DOM, and Richard Garcia. The Korean form was discharged on October 18, 2011, by S.M. Diversion as the lead single from the collection. An English variant was in this manner discharged in the United States on December 20, 2011, by Interscope Records and Universal Music Group so as to extend the gathering's prevalence outside their local nation. "The Boys" is a move pop, electropop and R&B melody with components of hip jump that expressively talks about female allure. 

Following the arrival of "The Boys", Girls' Generation showed up on a few South Korean music programs including "Music Bank", "Show! Music Core", "Inkigayo", and "M Countdown". To additionally elevate the tune to American gatherings of people, the gathering performed at Madison Square Garden in New York City on December 19, 2011, and made their introduction on US TV with appearances on "Late Show with David Letterman" and "Live! with Kelly and Michael" in February 2012. A music video for the melody was coordinated by Hong Won-ki and arranged by Rino Nakasone and was discharged on October 19, 2011. 

"The Boys" was a triumph locally. It topped on the South Korean Gaon Digital Chart and sold more than three million advanced duplicates in 2011, turning into the 43rd best-performing single on the outline of the year. Universally, the single got commonly positive surveys from music faultfinders, who complimented the tune as one of the features of the Korean Wave. In the United States, it figured out how to sell more than 21,000 duplicates in its first seven day stretch of discharge and topped at number 5 on the "Announcement" Hot Dance Singles Sales, while in Japan, the single crested at number 12 on the "Board" Japan Hot 100. 

"The Boys" was delivered by Teddy Riley. The first Korean variant of the tune was composed by Riley, Yoo Young-jin, Teasung Kim, DOM, and Richard Garcia. The English variant was likewise composed by similar lyricists; it was discharged on October 18, 2011, as an advanced single worldwide by S.M. Diversion. An advanced broadened play which comprises of the English form and remixes of "The Boys" was discharged on December 20, 2011, by S.M. Diversion under restrictive permit to Universal Music Group. A maxi single of the melody discharged on December 21, 2011. A remix variant of the melody created by electronica artists Clinton Sparks and The Disco Fries highlighting Snoop Dogg was incorporated on the US release. A Japanese adaptation was composed by Hidenori Tanaka and Nozomi Maezawa and was incorporated on the gathering's reissue of their introduction Japanese collection, "Young ladies' Generation", which was entitled "The Boys" and discharged on December 28, 2011. 

To additionally elevate their fame to Western nations, S.M. Amusement had the gathering marked with Interscope Records, which is subsidiary with Universal Music Group, to make a big appearance in the United States. In a meeting with MTV K, part Tiffany shared that the chronicle session of the tune, both the English and Korean adaptation, took multi week to wrap up. She additionally communicated her fervor of the tune's discharge in the United States, "We haven’t began a full-length collection, however we’re commencing with this maxi single and ideally it will prompt a full-length collection." 

Musically, "The Boys" is a move pop, electropop and R&B tune, with components of hip bounce, a sort that Girls' Generation had never wandered into. It highlights "military style drum breakdowns and executioner vocal harmonies" in its sythesis, as per Angelica Wallingford from the "San Diego City Times". The tune's verses as clarified by Eun-Young Jung on the book "The Korean Wave: Korean Media Go Global" (2013) as depicting "explicitly brave young ladies" who are certain about their appeal and appreciate consideration from men: 

I can tell you're taking a gander at me, I comprehend what you see 

Any closer and you'll feel the warmth 

You don't need to imagine that you didn't see me 

Each look will make it difficult to relax 

B-Bring the young men out 

In November and December 2011, Girls' Generation showed up on a few South Korean music programs including "Music Bank", "Show! Music Core", "Inkigayo", and "M Countdown" to advance "The Boys" and the collection. To additionally elevate the tune to American gatherings of people, the gathering showed up at Madison Square Garden in New York on October 23, 2011, and played out the tune, as a major aspect of a SM Town show, which likewise highlighted other S.M. Stimulation's vocalists and entertainers, including Shinee and f(x). 

Young ladies' Generation advanced "The Boys" after making their introduction on American TV in February 2011. The gathering played out the English adaptation of the melody on two TV programs: "Late Show with David Letterman" and "Live! with Kelly and Michael" on February 1. Their exhibitions got commonly positive audits from US news sources. Bradley Stern from MuuMuse named the gathering's appearances on US TV a "dazzling win" for supporters of Korean music, while David Bevan from "Turn" stated "It resembles a fantasy." Nevertheless, watchers' reaction were divided–some blamed the individuals for lip matching up and communicated their hate for their execution, while others were awed by the gathering's moving aptitudes and melodic style. 

A music video for "The Boys" was coordinated by Hong Won-ki and arranged by Rino Nakasone. It was discharged on October 19, 2011, on YouTube and a few South Korean music sites. The video begins with a nearby of every part before changing to the moving scenes. It was a moment accomplishment on YouTube, accomplishing 13 million perspectives in a single week. It has since pulled in more than 100 million perspectives on YouTube, turning into the gathering's third music video to do as such after "Well" and "I Got a Boy". With this accomplishment, Girls' Generation turned into the primary music young lady gathering to have three music recordings with more than 100 million perspectives as of September 2014, outperforming the Pussycat Dolls, who had two recordings with more than 100 million perspectives. 

"The Boys" was an accomplishment in South Korea. Following its discharge, the melody quickly accomplished number one spots on music programs "Music Bank", "Inkigayo", and "M Countdown". On "Music Bank", the single involved the main position for about a month and a half. It crested at number one on the Gaon Digital Chart and sold over 3.032 million computerized downloads in 2011, turning into the tenth top of the line single and the 43rd best-performing single (counting gushing and instrumental track downloads) on the Gaon Chart. The single additionally crested on the "Announcement" Korea K-Pop Hot 100. In the United States, the track topped at numbers 5 and 15 the Hot Dance Singles Sales and Hot Singles Sales, individually, and figured out how to sell 21,000 duplicates in its first seven day stretch of discharge, as indicated by Nielsen SoundScan. In Japan, "The Boys" diagrammed at number 12 on the "Announcement" Japan Hot 100 outline. 

"The Boys" got commonly positive surveys from music commentators. Katherine St Asaph from Popdust gave the melody three and a half out of five stars, complimenting the tune's generation however censuring its absence of an "essential" chorale. Jen Erenza from Ryan Seacrest's authentic blog lauded it as a "foot-stepping, head-crackin', and young lady fueled track sung by nine young ladies that everybody needs to hear". AllMusic's Tim Sendra named it the best tune on "The Boys" and composed that "Young ladies' Generation have the stuff to vanquish the universe of pop". Chris True from a similar site picked "The Boys" just as its English form and remix highlighting Snoop Dogg as three remarkable tunes all through the gathering's profession. 

Jaeki Cho from "Vibe" portrayed the gathering's music as "Flavor Girls meet Pussycat Dolls" and suggested "The Boys" to download. Smith Sonian noticed "The Boys" as one of the features of Korean music (K-fly) in the Korean Wave alongside "Just One" by BoA, "Heartbroken, Sorry" by Super Junior, "Gangnam Style" by Psy, "Phenomenal Baby" by Big Bang", and "I Am the Best" by 2NE1. 

A few commentators expected that Girls' Generation would make progress with their electropop music styles following their appearance on US TV. Mio Scobie, editorial manager of "Us Weekly" composed that "They produce feelgood beats, quickly important tunes and, as I'm certain individuals have officially seen, they're staggering." "McClure's Asia Music News" essayist Steve McClure additionally foreseen that the gathering would prevail on the Western music scene, saying that "I have an inclination that Girls' Generation will stick round for some time." 

Notes 

References