Do Ya Thang (Rihanna tune) 

"Do Ya Thang" is a tune by Barbadian chronicle craftsman Rihanna, taken from the select release of her 6th studio collection, "Talk That Talk" (2011). It was composed by Terius Nash and Rihanna herself, with generation helmed by Nash under his stage-name The-Dream. "Do Ya Thang" is a R&B melody with conspicuous impacts of music from the 1980s. The tune utilizes "snappy" drum breaks, synths and "astounding" and "inconspicuous" snare. Expressively, it is a complimentary love track that contains "revile" words and a redundant melody. 

"Do Ya Thang" got overwhelmingly positive audits from music commentators, with a considerable lot of them commending its piece and sound, while additionally connecting it to Rihanna's past works from her first studio collection "Music of the Sun" (2005). Upon the arrival of "Talk That Talk", the melody appeared on the lower areas of the singles graphs in South Korea and the United Kingdom; at number 80 and 136 individually. It additionally appeared on the UK R&B Chart at number 38. 

"Do Ya Thang" was composed by The-Dream and Rihanna. The-Dream delivered the melody. He additionally co-composed two additional tunes on the collection: its fourth single "Birthday celebration Cake" and "Red Lipstick", with the last likewise being included on the choice version of "Talk That Talk" (2011). Rihanna recorded "Do Ya Thang" at a few chronicle studios amid her worldwide Loud Tour (2011), including Pelican Hill, in Newport Coast, California and Studio De La Grande Armăše in Paris, France. The melody was blended by Manny Marroquin while Erik Madrid and Chris Galland filled in as blending partners. The vocal generation of "Do Ya Thang" was finished by Kuk Harrell and helped by Jennifer Rosales. 

"Do Ya Thang" is a R&B melody with noticeable impacts of music from the 1980s. The melody has a length of 3 minutes and 44 seconds. Shaun Kitchener of Entertainmentwise.com depicted the tune as a "hip bounce seasoned pop treat". "Do Ya Thang" utilizes "snappy" drum breaks, synths, "out of control" and "unpretentious" snare that, concurring Gigwise's Edward Keeble, can be found on Rihanna's 2007 single "Umbrella" ("Good Girl Gone Bad", 2007), which was additionally co-composed by Nash. Keeble further considered the melody a "cutting edge exemplary". Emily Exton of Popdust noticed the melody's likeness with the collection's second single "You da One", "recorded over a noisy '80s synth". 

Expressively, "Do Ya Thang" is a complimentary love tune that contains "revile" words and a dreary chorale. Robert Copsey of Digital Spy composed that the melody has a straightforward message obvious in the verses, "By the day's end you are your identity and I adore you that way." Maz Halima of Flavor Magazine portrayed the track as a "peaceful tune". "Do Ya Thang" contains the line "And you my darling/But I adore you like a sibling" which, as indicated by Popdust's Exton, is reminiscent of performing artist Angelina Jolie and her sibling James Haven at the Oscars. Exton further clarified that the tune is full with dubious depictions of Rihanna's emotions, which result as "empty" presentation that she is failing to go away. While singing the lines "Center of the Day/Give Me What I need/It feels so exceptional/It feels so great" she concedes "loving evening delights". 

As per Maz Hallima of Flavor Magazine, "Do Ya Thang" has an extremely "youngster ish vibe" which as indicated by her functions admirably, anyway she knows why Rihanna kept it as a little something extra track of the collection. Sam Lansky of MTV Buzzworthy composed that the melody "can't be beat for sheer agreeability". He further noticed that Rihanna is venturing once more from her "hypersexual persona to sing an increasingly sincere, well-meaning tune". Michael Jepson of "The Fourth State" presumed that "Do Ya Thang", together with "Arrogance (Love It)" and "Roc Me Out", are the top hopefuls from "Talk That Talk" that can be named as the collection's "features". As per Jepson, every one of the three melodies are "obtrusively awkward" and feel like a follow up to Rihanna's 2011 single "S&M" ("Loud", 2011). Shaun Kitchener of EntertainmentWise presumed that Rihanna "chills out for 'Do Ya Thang', and we get an uncommon look at Sweet Loving Rihanna." 

Credits adjusted from the liner notes of "Talk That Talk", Def Jam Recordings, SRP Records. 

Upon the arrival of "Talk That Talk", because of computerized downloads "Do Ya Thang" graphed on the singles diagrams in South Korea and the United Kingdom. It appeared on the South Korea Gaon International Chart at number 80 on November 26, 2011, with offers of 6,288 computerized duplicates. In the United Kingdom, "Do Ya Thang" appeared at number 38 on the UK R&B Chart on November 27, 2011. The melody additionally appeared at number 136 on the UK Singles Chart for the diagram issue dated December 3, 2011.