A Very Gaga Holiday 

A Very Gaga Holiday is a live EP discharged by Lady Gaga, containing melodies performed on the ABC occasion TV unique "A Very Gaga Thanksgiving". It was made accessible for buy in the United States on November 22, 2011, solely on the iTunes Store and Amazon, and on November 26 in the remainder of the world. The EP is comprised of jazz fronts of the melodies "Orange Colored Sky" and "White Christmas", the last including an additional stanza included by Gaga herself, and acoustic forms of "You and I" and "The Edge of Glory", the two tunes initially from the vocalist's second studio collection, "Brought into the world This Way" (2011). A common subject on the EP is Gaga ceasing halfway through singing to discuss foundation data on the tunes with her audience members. 

Following its discharge, "A Very Gaga Holiday" got blended surveys from music commentators. Commentator Stephen Thomas Erlewine, composing for Allmusic, recorded "White Christmas" and "Orange Colored Sky" as features, while Amelia Proud, composing for the "Day by day Mail", observed the discharge to be sub-par and flimsier than Gaga's different works. "A Very Gaga Holiday" entered the collection diagrams of Canada, France, and the United States, while "White Christmas" entered the single outlines of Belgium, Japan, and the United Kingdom. 

Gaga secured "Orange Colored Sky" amid an unexpected appearance at The Oak Room in New York City on September 29, 2010, and again on January 5, 2011. Brian Newman filled in as a visitor entertainer on trumpet for exhibitions at the Robin Hood Gala on May 9, 2011, to profit the Robin Hood Foundation, and at BBC Radio 1's Big Weekend in Carlisle, England on May 15, 2011. Gaga later performed it on the ABC Christmas unique "A Very Gaga Thanksgiving", alongside a spread form of "White Christmas". Gaga put accentuation on the jazz side of the melody. She included a second section, portraying the first tune as "excessively short". In the stanza, Gaga depicts a snowman, saying that Santa Claus is en route to meet him. The verses end with Gaga saying, "Alright, so I guess it's not white outside yet." The melodies on "A Very Gaga Holiday" were recorded amid the shooting of "A Very Gaga Thanksgiving" at the Convent of the Sacred Heart, New York City. 

On November 22, 2011, "A Very Gaga Holiday" was discharged as an advanced EP. Both "Orange Colored Sky" and "White Christmas" were incorporated into the discharge, alongside two different tracks which were likewise performed: moderate renditions of Gaga's 2011 singles "The Edge of Glory" and "You and I", the two melodies which initially included on Gaga's second studio collection, "Brought into the world This Way". Interscope Records reported the discharge after the opening of the Holiday Wonderland Gaga Workshop at Barneys New York. It was discharged in the United States to the iTunes Store and Amazon and had an overall discharge to iTunes following four days. 

Gaga's front of "White Christmas" is a "snazzy interpretation" and highlights an additional section about a snowman. Most of the way into the spread, before starting the new refrain, Gaga says, "So as should be obvious, I'm active and somewhat modest, yet I've chosen that this melody is simply excessively short. It's such a lovely Christmas tune yet it's solitary one stanza, so I included an additional one." "You and I" is without the melodic plans from the rendition in "Brought into the world This Way", and highlights instrumentation from a piano and a trumpet, which is played part of the way through the tune. Every once in a while, Gaga yells "America" while singing the melody. Her acoustic form of "The Edge of Glory" starts with a monolog, clarifying her commitment of the tune to her granddad: "It's the second Thanksgiving I'm spending without my grandpa, and I composed this tune about him, so here it is. So Grandma, in case you're watching at home, this current one's for you." Following the principal ensemble, Gaga quits playing her piano and recounts to an anecdote about Italian treats. A common topic for the tunes is Gaga halting halfway through singing to participate in discussion with the audience members. 

In the United States, the EP appeared at number 52 on the "Announcement" 200 with offers of 22,000 duplicates, for the week finishing December 10, 2011. That week, the uncommon likewise influenced Gaga's second studio collection, "Brought into the world This Way", which climbed the "Board" 200 graph from position 72 to 21, with offers of 47,000 duplicates (up 416% from earlier week). As of April 2016, "A Very Gaga Holiday" has sold 44,000 duplicates in the US as indicated by Nielsen SoundScan. Gaga's adaptation of "White Christmas" entered the UK Singles Chart at numberâ 87, for the week finishing December 3, 2011. A similar form additionally entered the Belgium (Flanders) Singles Chart at numberâ 86, for the week finishing dated December 24, 2011, and the Japan Hot 100 singles at number 93. In Canada, "A Very Gaga Holiday" appeared at number 74 on the Canadian Albums Chart and in France, it entered the SNEP Download Albums Chart at number 26. 

Stephen Thomas Erlewine from AllMusic granted the EP three out of five stars, saying that the discharge was an "appealing occasion trinket" and that albeit Gaga's fundamental persona was about validness, she seemed to "push her affectations" substantially more than required on the tunes. Erlewine picked "White Christmas" and "Orange Colored Sky" as his top decisions from the EP. Evigshed Magazine's Sylvia Lesas complimented the melodic game plan of the tracks, saying that Gaga's vocals were a feature of the EP and including, "'The Edge of Glory' highlighting delightful piano line gives me chills. It is a genuinely moving form. [Gaga] makes each tune unique." Erin Strecker from "Amusement Weekly" gave a shining audit of the discharge, clarifying that Gaga's fans may have been expecting a discharge like "A Very Gaga Holiday" which offered unmistakable quality to the artist's vocals. She included that the melodies indicated "how much her voice truly is appropriate for the enormous band and jazz-time stylings on these tunes". 

Credits and work force adjusted from advanced booklet.