The Heart Is a Lonely Hunter (Once Upon a Time) 

"The Heart Is a Lonely Hunter" is the seventh scene of the primary period of the American fantasy/show TV arrangement "Sometime in the distant past", and the seventh in general. The scene was co-composed by arrangement makers Adam Horowitz and Edward Kitsis, while being coordinated by David M. Barrett. Horowitz and Kitsis had proposed to slaughter off Graham since the pilot scene was grabbed, trusting that it would include "stakes" to the arrangement and show watchers that the story is "not in Henry's mind." The scene is viewed as huge, as Graham's demise uncovers that Regina knows about her fantasy past. 

The arrangement happens in the anecdotal ocean side town of Storybrooke, Maine, in which the inhabitants are really characters from different fantasies that were transported to "this present reality" town by an amazing condemnation. This current scene's story pursues Sheriff Graham (Jamie Dornan) as he recollects his fantasy partner, prompting noteworthy results that parallel his past life as the Huntsman. It originally publicized in the United States on ABC on December 11, 2011. An expected 8.91 million watchers viewed the scene, putting third in its timeslot behind NBC and CBS. The scene got blended surveys from TV faultfinders, as some commended Dornan's character yet were partitioned on the completion succession. It was the arrangement's mid-season finale. 

In Granny's Cafe, Sheriff Graham (Jamie Dornan) tosses darts at an image of a deer in all respects precisely. Emma Swan (Jennifer Morrison) arrives yet leaves quickly on the grounds that she has not excused him for concealing his association with Regina (Lana Parrilla). Emma endeavors to dodge discussion, yet Graham is unyielding on disclosing to her he feels nothing for Regina. He kisses Emma and all of a sudden observes a dream of a wolf, just to have Emma push him away. Disappointed by Emma's absence of getting, Graham, tanked, later engages in sexual relations with Regina. Amidst the night, he stirs suddenly from a fantasy of a deer and a wolf. At the point when Graham reveals to Regina that the fantasy felt like a memory, Regina endeavors to persuade him to remain, disclosing to him that he's as yet smashed, yet Graham leaves. As Graham endeavors to get to his vehicle, the wolf from his dreams shows up alongside him, frightening him before it leaves. As he endeavors to discover the two-timer, he keeps running into Mr. Gold (Robert Carlyle). Graham informs him regarding the wolf, and Mr. Gold recommends to him that fantasies are recollections from another life. 

The next morning, Emma finds blooms on the table and tosses them out, accepting they are from Graham, yet Mary Margaret (Ginnifer Goodwin) says that they were hers from Dr. Whale (David Anders), with whom she had a one-night stand. Emma is happy to hear that Mary Margaret seems, by all accounts, to be getting over David (Josh Dallas). Mary Margaret reveals to Emma that clearly she has affections for Graham, however does not recognize them since she is setting up a "divider" to shield herself from getting injured. 

The sheriff finds the fraud, and when he whistles, the wolf goes to him. As he pets the wolf's head, he sees himself holding a blade, going to hurt the lady he just knows as Mary Margaret. Graham visits her study hall, disclosing to her that he trusts they know each other from another life, before Storybrooke. Mary Margaret expect that the sheriff has been conversing with Henry, and keeping in mind that this isn't the situation, this gives Graham the plan to counsel Henry about his book. In the mean time, at the sheriff's office, Regina appears and cautions Emma to avoid Graham, clearly desirous of his association with Emma. 

Graham visits Henry (Jared S. Gilmore) and portrays his dreams, to which Henry answers that he should be the ruler's Huntsman. The Huntsman was employed by the Evil Queen to evacuate Snow White's heart and take it back to her, yet when he doesn't do as such, she expels his heart. Graham later endeavors to disclose to Emma that he couldn't feel anything with Regina since he doesn't show some kindness. Graham and Emma then experience the wolf from Graham's dreams, and tail it to a memorial park and vault set apart with an image Graham found in his dreams and in Henry's book. Searching for his heart, Graham intensely looks through the vault, which ends up being the tomb of Henry Mills. Regina touches base to put blooms on her dad's grave and is enraged to discover them there. 

Regina blames Emma for taking the sheriff from her, and Emma reacts that Regina has pursued everybody away. Graham protects Emma, and the ladies trade blows. Afterward, while Graham cleans Emma's injuries, Regina pushes aside the stone inside the vault, which turns out not to be a tomb all things considered; the stone uncovers a staircase. Emma understands her affections for Graham and the two kiss similarly as Regina opens a capacity confine the shrouded room and grips Graham's heart, smashing it to clean, demonstrating that she was the Evil Queen. Before he crumples and passes on, Graham's final words to Emma are "I recall! Much thanks to you." 

In the Enchanted Forest, the Evil Queen grieves the passing of her significant other, Snow White's dad, in spite of the fact that she herself is in charge of his demise. Snow (Goodwin) and the Queen apparently comfort each other over the misfortune. The Queen counsels her enchantment reflect (Esposito) to ask how she can slaughter Snow, who is darling by the general population yet a risk to her offer for the honored position. She says that the lord's knights won't murder his girl, and the mirror discloses to her that she needs a huntsman. As Graham found in his flashbacks, the Huntsman (Dornan) and his sibling wolf appear to appreciate carrying on with a tranquil life in the forested areas. The Huntsman executes just for himself to live, and has no sympathy for people, who don't comprehend nature. As the Huntsman and his wolf enter a bar, different benefactors start badgering him, inciting him to effectively protect himself. His execution is seen in the enchantment reflect by the Queen, who is enormously awed. She gathers the Huntsman to offer him anything he needs depending on the prerequisite that he brings her Snow's heart. He consents to this arrangement, consequently requesting the assurance of the considerable number of deceivers Forest. 

Snow and the Huntsman walk together in the backwoods, and she sees through his mask and effectively surmises that he was sent by the Queen to slaughter her. Snow escapes, yet as the Huntsman makes up for lost time with her, he discovers her composition a letter, which she demands he convey to the ruler after she is killed. The Huntsman takes out his blade, yet as opposed to executing her, he forms a whistle out of a bamboo stick, disclosing to her that it will gather help and afterward advising her to run. The Huntsman at that point comes back to the ruler with a deer heart, trusting that she won't know the distinction. The ruler requests that he read her the letter, which is a conciliatory sentiment for past wrongs just as a solicitation from Snow that her stepmother rule the kingdom with empathy. The ruler consumes the letter and takes the crate with the heart in it to store in her vault. When she can't open one of her stockpiling safes, it demonstrates that the Huntsman deceived her; the heart isn't human. The Queen has her watchmen drag him to her chamber and she yanks his sparkling heart out of his body. She tells the Huntsman that starting now and into the foreseeable future he will be her pet (explicitly just as something else) and will do her offering everlastingly, and in the event that he ever deceives her, she should simply crush (which she does in Storybrooke to execute him). 

The scene was co-composed by co-makers Edward Kitsis and Adam Horowitz, and was coordinated by "The Mentalist" veteran David M. Barrett. Visitor performer Giancarlo Esposito showed up in the arrangement as Magic Mirror/Sidney Glass. Meghan Ory returned as Ruby/Red Riding Hood, while Scott Heindl showed up for the arrangement as Bartholomew. Paving the way to the scene communicate, Kitsis and Horowitz noticed that "The Heart Is a Lonely Hunter" would include outcomes of occasions that happened in the past scene. Horowitz clarified, "Emma is in a crude passionate spot, attempting to grapple with her sentiments about what she found about Graham. Graham is likewise in an exceptionally crude passionate spot since he's unmistakably tangled and it's this cauldron of feelings that prompts the kiss." Kitsis included that, "We're truly energized that the kiss that you've seen is actually simply the bouncing off purpose of the story we're telling. Dislike it closes with the kiss, it begins with that and it takes us some place that we're eager to demonstrate you." 

In the scene, the character of Sheriff Graham was slaughtered off, something that performer Jamie Dornan had known would occur since ABC got the pilot. It was the main real passing of the arrangement. In a meeting with E! journalist Kristin Dos Santos, Dornan implied that while his partner in Storybrooke has kicked the bucket, the huntsman could return sooner or later, as Dornan is as yet an ordinary on the arrangement. As a significant part of the scene includes Graham finding his fantasy past, the authors structured the scene to deceive watchers by having them put resources into the character. Kitsis and Horowitz remarked that while the demise made them "pitiful," the fight among Emma and Regina requires "stakes and sadly, some of the time stakes are individuals' lives." They likewise chose to kill the character generally right off the bat in the arrangement so as to demonstrate watchers that "it's genuine. It's not in Henry's mind." Kitsis proceeded, "It’s intriguing, yet some portion of the purpose was to make you cherish him and we adored him without a doubt. Also, the way that the gathering of people appears to have adored him implies a great deal to us, in that we have a feeling that we prevailing on that front. On the off chance that you don’t feel tragic, at that point it was a disappointment of the execution of the story." 

Performer Lana Parrilla trusted that Graham helped fill a void for her character, remarking that his misfortune "was difficult for [Regina]. That’s why, when she pounds his heart, there’s a remove originating from her eye. She didn’t need to do it, yet she had no way out — practically like how she had no way out to slaughter her dad. I’m not saying I concur with it, yet for the character, it’s what she needed to do." Parrilla additionally refered to "The Heart Is a Lonely Hunter" as the principal scene where watchers see "how the two universes impacted," a reference to Regina's capacity to execute Graham by crushing the core of his fantasy partner. The disclosure of the vault, Kitsis and Horowitz clarified, "is an imperative thing for us regarding pushing ahead in the season in that we needed to send a reasonable message that Regina knows what’s going on and has some extremely clear aims in Storybrooke." The scene was incorporated into "Stirred: A Once Upon a Time Tale" – a novelization of the main season – which was distributed by Hyperion Books in 2013. 

For the third week straight, the appraisals by and by slipped, as it set 2.9/7 among grown-ups matured 18–49 and a 5.2/8 generally, with just 8.91 million watchers tuning in. It positioned third in its timeslot, being beaten by "Football Night In America" on NBC and "an hour" on CBS however in front of "The Simpsons" on the Fox arrange. "The Heart Is a Lonely Hunter" filled in as the arrangement's mid-season finale, as the following scene disclosed on January 8, 2012. In Canada, the scene completed in twelfth spot for the week with an expected 1.6 million watchers, a slight increment from the 1.55 million of the past scene. 

"The Heart Is a Lonely Hunter" got blended audits from TV faultfinders. 

Television Fanatic essayist C. Orlando delighted in the scene, commenting "I adore "Some time ago" in light of the fact that it resembles a smaller than normal motion picture each week and I'm totally captivated by this interesting other world loaded up with characters that vibe well-known yet totally new." He called the consummation scene "disastrous." IGN essayist Amy Ratcliffe evaluated the scene 9/10, giving specific acclaim to Jamie Dornan's capacity to be "attractive in each scene." Ratcliffe called his backstory her most loved fantasy of the arrangement up to that point. TV Without Pity's Cindy McLennan wished they had not executed Graham, however offered credit to the essayists for making her consideration about him. She finished up, "Scenes like this give me solid trust in the second piece of this season, one-nighters what not. Expedite the agony, young men." She evaluated the scene with an A. 

"Impact Magazine" journalist Christopher Peck was disillusioned that the scholars had not yet uncovered the purpose behind the Evil Queen's resentment, remarking, "If what stands out most around a scene of TV is the thing that I didn’t get out, that’s a dismal sign: a portending that the show has no goddamn piece of information where it’s headed." He did anyway appreciate seeing Graham's recollections, calling them and the different arrangement flashbacks "the freshest and most exciting piece of the show." While depicting Graham's demise as "disastrous," Peck felt that it "totally invalidates any headway the scene made." He evaluated the scene with a C+. 

"Amusement Weekly"s Shaunna Murphy was somewhat more condemning of the scene, however she called it "diversion evolving." Noting that it "felt hurried," she "would have favored a moderate consuming puzzle spread out more than a few scenes over this emotional, Nikki and Paulo-style remain solitary sendoff." Murphy anyway reasoned that Graham's passing was "one of the coolest groupings we've seen so far on this show." "The A.V. Club" reporter Oliver Sava reviewed "The Heart Is a Lonely Hunter" with a C. He additionally noted negative likenesses to the TV arrangement "Lost", clarifying, "Recall when Jack, Sawyer, and Kate were stuck in the polar-bear confines, and the plot just meandered in a purposeless cloudiness? When a bundle of watchers began bouncing off on the grounds that the essayists continued including inquiries while never giving answers? What took "Lost" 44 scenes, "OUAT" has done in seven." Unlike different analysts, Sava considered the consummation a "baffling end," and trusted that "Horowitz and Kitsis [took] one stage forward and two stages back with this advancement."