New Year's Eve (Up All Night) 

"New Year's Eve" is the twelfth scene of the primary period of the American satire TV arrangement "Up All Night". The scene initially broadcast on NBC in the United States on January 12, 2012. It was composed by Erica Rivinoja and was coordinated by Beth McCarthy-Miller. The scene likewise included a visitor appearance from Jason Lee as Chris and Reagan's neighbor and Ava's sweetheart, Kevin. 

Amid Reagan (Christina Applegate) and Chris' (Will Arnett) first New Year's Eve amusement night, Reagan's aggressiveness turns out causing Chris to wind up humiliated. In the interim, Missy (Jennifer Hall) conveys a sudden date along to the gathering and, Kevin (Jason Lee) begins to feel just as Ava (Maya Rudolph) might be embarrassed about him. 

"New Year's Eve" got for the most part positive surveys from faultfinders. As indicated by the Nielsen Media Research, "New Year's Eve" drew 4.28 million watchers and got a 2.0 rating/5% share in the 18–49 statistic, denoting a 5% ascend in the appraisals from the past scene, "First Christmas". It positioned third in its timeslot and was the second most astounding evaluated NBC program of the following evening "The Office". 

After not having the capacity to discover a sitter for Amy, Reagan recommends that the two toss a diversion night, a thought Chris doesn't respond well to. They welcome Ava, Kevin, Missy, yet Chris endeavors to conceal the diversions because of Reagan's focused nature. He endeavors to make her guarantee that she won't be excessively focused, yet she does which makes the gathering ungainly. While playing Rock Band the two get in a battle when Chris loses the beat on the drums since he was seeing his "drumming arm". Reagan choose to a make a rundown of "Things We Are Going to Stop Doing That Embarrass Each Other in 2012", which highlights irritating propensities that the two need each other to surrender. Be that as it may, before 2011 arrives at an end the two delete everything from the rundown aside from Chris' Borat impression and Reagen's aggressive nature. 

In the mean time, Ava is approached to be the amazing marshal to a New Year's Day march. This makes her beau, Kevin, feel like he can't satisfy her way of life. He at that point begins supposing she might be embarrassed about him, particularly after he isn't welcome to sit with her amid the motorcade. In the end, Kevin goes up against Ava on this and she uncovers that on the off chance that she wrecks their relationship she doesn't had any desire to be helped to remember it while Googling her name. He guarantees her that their relationship won't end gravely and the two go to the motorcade. 

"New Year's Eve" was composed by regulating maker Erica Rivinoja, denoting her third composition credit for the arrangement after "Mr. Weave's Toddler Kaleidoscope" and "Guardians". The scene was coordinated by Beth McCarthy-Miller, who recently worked with maker Emily Spivey and official maker Lorne Michaels on "Saturday Night Live" as chief for a long time. The scene includes a visitor appearance from Jason Lee as Kevin, Ava's sweetheart. He initially showed up in the eighth scene, "First Night Away" and is as of now set to show up in a common job for the arrangement. Lee had recently worked with Spivey and Michaels in the wake of facilitating a scene of "Saturday Night Live" on November 12, 2005. This is the first run through the arrangement broadcast in the 9:30 pm timeslot for the main season after "The Office"; the arrangement recently publicized in the 8:00pm timeslot on Wednesday. The arrangement exchanged timeslots with another NBC parody arrangement, "Whitney". A few media commentators have said that the objective for moving the arrangement was so as to make it to a greater degree an evaluations achievement, similar to "The Office". 

"New Year's Eve" initially broadcast on NBC in the United States on January 12, 2012. The scene was seen by an expected 4.24 million watchers and got a 2.0 rating/5% share among grown-ups between the ages of 18 and 49. This implies it was seen by 2.0% of every one of the 18-to 49-year-olds, and 5% of each of the 18-to 49-year-olds staring at the TV at the season of the communicate. This denoted a 5% ascend in the evaluations from the past scene, "First Christmas". The scene completed third in its availability alongside "The Office", being beaten by "Dark's Anatomy" which got a 3.8 rating/9% share and the CBS dramatization "Individual of Interest" which got a 3.2 rating/8% share in the 18–49 statistic. The scene, in any case, managed to beat the Fox dramatization arrangement "The Finder" and the CW show arrangement "The Secret Circle". Included with DVR watchers, who saw the scene inside seven days of the first communicate, the scene got a 3.0 rating in the 18–49 statistic, adding a 1.0 rating to the first viewership. 

"New Year's Eve" got a few positive audits from pundits. "New York" author Steven Heisler adulated the scene for maintaining a strategic distance from "sitcom-y domain" with the passionate completion. He additionally considered the arrangement a superior decision to pursue "The Office" at that point "Whitney". The A.V. Club commentator Margaret Eby supplemented the authenticity of the principle Reagen-Chris plot. Notwithstanding this, she condemned the Ava-Kevin subplot contrasting it with a storyline from "Sex and The City". She likewise noticed the plotline didn't remain consistent with the characters following their plotline in the past scene, "First Christmas". She at last appraised the scene with a B. Adam Victavage of "Glue" considered the scene an ideal progress from the past scenes and permitted Ava to be "a loveable unnecessary extra person wheel to a totally solid pair in Chris and Reagan". He additionally responded decidedly for the scenes highlighting Missy, contrasting her scenes with "early Ava, yet less offensive". He at last gave the scene a 8.7/10 calling it "exemplary". Bradford Evans of SplitSider adulated Jennifer Hall's execution considering her the "unrecognized yet truly great individual" of the arrangement. He additionally responded decidedly towards the scene's capacity to bring together the show and "keep the majority of the characters on a similar turf". He reasoned that he trusted the arrangement could make itself an imperative piece of the system's lineup. HitFix analyst Alan Sepinwall called the scene "one its [the series] most grounded scenes to date". He composed that the expansion of Jason Lee acculturated Ava more and gave her an increasingly normal motivation to visit Reagan and Chris at home. He likewise composed that the scene chipped away at a "character level".