Up All Night Tour 

The Up All Night Tour was the first featuring show visit by English-Irish kid band One Direction, in help of their presentation studio collection, "Up All Night" (2011). It started in December 2011 and was One Direction's first solo visit in the wake of being framed in the seventh arrangement of "The X Factor" and being marked to Syco Records. The show visit was declared in September 2011, with the underlying dates for UK and Ireland being uncovered. The visit inevitably extended to Oceania and North America, with the band playing 54 appears altogether. 

The setlist incorporated melodies from One Direction's introduction collection and five spreads. Pundits lauded One Direction's singing capacities and stage nearness, and the creation of the show. The visit was financially fruitful, and a chronicle of the show at the Bournemouth International Center was made for "", which was discharged on DVD in May 2012. The DVD was a business achievement, beating the graphs in twenty-five nations, and made diagram history in the US. By August 2012, the video collection had sold more than one million duplicates around the world. 

In the wake of being shaped and completing third in the seventh arrangement of "The X Factor" in 2010, One Direction were marked to Syco Music. The gathering and nine different hopefuls from the arrangement partook in "The X Factor Live Tour 2011" from February 2011 to April 2011. The visit saw the gathering performing for 500,000 individuals all through the UK. While performing on "The X Factor Live Tour 2011" in April 2011, the gathering uncovered that they would leave on a performance visit "soon". 

One Direction's presentation feature UK show visit, the Up All Night Tour, was formally reported on 27 September 2011. Set for December 2011 and January 2012, the visit would feature their then-up and coming introduction collection, and would start on 18 December 2011 in Watford, England and end on 26 January 2012 in Belfast, Northern Ireland. One Direction declared the performance visit not long after discharging their first single, "What Makes You Beautiful". Shows in the UK and Ireland were moment offer outs making extra shows be included. In February 2012, One Direction declared the Oceania leg, with visit dates planned for April 2012, visiting Sydney, Brisbane, Melbourne, Auckland and Wellington. While advancing the visit, band part Liam Payne expressed the gathering needed this trek to be a "world visit". When the principal leg of the visit was finished, the band joined Big Time Rush as the opening follow up on the Better With U Tour. 

Amid a break from shows, One Direction advanced their collection in the United States. Following an appearance on "The Today Show", "Up All Night" was discharged in the US and One Direction turned into the first since forever UK gathering to have their presentation collection bow on the "Bulletin" 200. This prompted the gathering expanding the visit into North America. On 21 March 2012, One Direction declared the North American leg of the visit. The North American leg would begin on 24 May 2012 and contain 26 appears. Not long after, English artist musician Olly Murs was affirmed to be the opening represent select dates on the visit. 

The shows in England and Ireland got blended input from faultfinders. Kitty Empire of "The Observer" was not awed with the show at Windsor Hall. Realm expressed, "It's anything but difficult to scoff at kid groups, yet constantly worth thinking about their intrigue. It's implied that One Direction are smooth, and regularly flat. Except for their convincing No 1 single, "What Makes You Beautiful", their tunes aren't fiercely unmistakable". For the show at the HMV Hammersmith Apollo in London, James Robertson of "Day by day Mirror" gave the band a positive survey. He expresses, "The room shook with hair raising, ear drum penetrating and (if there had been windows) glass-breaking shouts. Each took a turn strolling forward to grasp the cries from the sold-out Hammersmith Apollo while singing the faltering named Na, Na, Na. It was difficult to tell which one of the five young men had the greatest applause yet the most intense cheer came when Niall played acoustic guitar as they sang solo around a counterfeit pit fire". The show was decidedly surveyed by Alexandra Ryan of "Night Herald" for the show at Dublin's The O. She says, "They came, they saw, they prevailed. Dreams worked out as expected for a huge number of Irish female fans as their pop symbols One Direction made that big appearance at the O2. Swarms of shouting young ladies ran to the sold-out scene the previous evening as Zayn, Harry, Louis, Liam and Mullingar youngster Niall Horan performed for 14,000 fans". 

As the visit advanced to Oceania and North America, numerous faultfinders commented on the band's fame and their singing capacities. For the Sydney show at Hordern Pavilion, Mike Wass from Idolator felt One Direction's "shockingly cultivated exertion" of Kings of Leon's "Utilization Somebody" demonstrated that they are "more than fit" of developing their sound. Cameron Adams of "Envoy Sun" composed a positive survey for the show in Melbourne at the Hisense Arena. He evaluated that One Direction spoke to a "shrewdly thrown pop band with a lot of identity released at the ideal time and catching their minute." He opined that the spreads performed exhibited "solid pop voices." Adams finished up as pursues: "Who knows whether they'll advance past the standard kid band life expectancy. In any case, for the present they're satisfying many individuals very." Reviewing the show in Fairfax at the Patriot Center, Chris Richards of "The Washington Post" expressed: "Through the span of umpteen tunes, its individuals didn't work the stage to such an extent as stand around on it. They looked agreeable. No senseless movement, only a couple of troupe clench hand siphons. No silly outfits, just letterman coats, cardigans and khakis. A straightforward sponsorship band — guitar, bass, consoles and drums — gave relentless interpretations of about the majority of the tunes on the gathering's presentation collection, "Up All Night", just as a couple of spreads, including Kings of Leon's "Utilization Somebody" and Natalie Imbruglia's "Torn." 

Lars Brandle of "Announcement" checked on the show at the BBEC Great Hall in Brisbane. Brandle prevalently noticed the band's ubiquity: "To state 1D is the most sultry kid band on the scene, doesn't exactly get a handle on the circumstance. "Ablaze" is nearer to the imprint." Brandle recognized the show for being "all smooth, clean fun". Erica Futterman of "Moving Stone" featured the gathering's acoustic exhibitions, which "flaunted Horan's capacity to play guitar, just as One Direction's splendid live vocals". Futterman inferred that there "was no compelling reason to stress over a sponsorship track or a bum note, a charming acknowledgment at a pop show". Jane Stevenson from Canoe.ca kept up that the show at the Molson Canadian Amphitheater in Toronto had "none of that arranged move hogwash", and complimented the "normally, tasteful, serene" generation. Tune Lau of "National Post" explored a similar show. Lau opined, "It's anything but difficult to lose all sense of direction in inborn intrigue of their splendidly coiffed dos and nearly too-set up together preppy style yet some place amidst all the adoration struck screeches of adolescent young ladies are folks who can really sing and, partly, engage." Lau furthermore noted One Direction's absence of unique material to play out, "the gathering falls back on a bunch of spreads to fill in their set, including Kings of Leon's "Utilization Somebody", Gym Class Heroes' "Stereo Hearts" and, shockingly, Natalie Imbruglia's "Torn". Not straying excessively far from the firsts, the mid-show variety certainly felt like the young men arbitrarily belting out melodies for filler however young ladies wouldn't fret." 

At the point when tickets for the shows in the UK and Ireland went marked down, shows allegedly moved toward becoming sell-outs inside minutes. It was accounted for almost 10,000 tickets were sold in 10 minutes for the band's shows in Auckland and Wellington. The sellout achievement proceeded in Australia. There, the band's shows in Sydney, Melbourne and Brisbane sold out in three minutes. Shows in the United States likewise sold out inside minutes. 

A chronicle of the Up All Night Tour was shot amid One Direction's 3 January 2012 show at the International Center in Bournemouth. Reporting the entire show with blends of behind the stage film, a video collection, "", was discharged on DVD in May 2012. The video show DVD beat the diagrams in twenty-five nations. In Australia, it appeared at number one on the ARIA DVD outline and was confirmed multiple times platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association (ARIA) for shipments of 90,000 units in its first seven day stretch of offer. In the United States, it appeared at number one on the "Announcement" DVD graph, selling 76,000 duplicates, outperforming offers of the "Board" 200 number one collection, John Mayer's "Brought up", which sold 65,000 duplicates. One Direction made US diagram history as the accomplishment denotes the first run through a music DVD surpassed the "Bulletin" 200 number one collection. The opening deals likewise makes it the most noteworthy music DVD presentation of 2012 and the second most elevated introduction in the previous five years behind Adele's "Live at the Royal Albert Hall", which propelled at number one in December 2011, with 96,000 duplicates. As of August 2012, the video collection had sold more than 1 million duplicates around the world. In the week finishing 27 January 2013, "Up All Night: The Live Tour" guaranteed its 30th week on top the Top Music Videos Chart, which is longer than some other title since the diagram started in March 1995. It outperformed Ray Stevens' "Satire Video Classics", which logged 29 weeks on top in 1993–1994. The account was at last ensured multiple times platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) on 29 May 2013, showing shipments of 500,000 duplicates. 

Credits taken and adjusted from Official Tour Program.