The Time Is Now (Millennium) 

"'The Time Is Now" is the twenty-third scene of the second period of the American wrongdoing spine chiller TV arrangement "Thousand years". It debuted on the Fox arrange on May 15, 1998. The scene was composed by Glen Morgan and James Wong, and coordinated by Thomas J. Wright. "The Time Is Now" highlighted visitor appearances by Kristen Cloke and Glenn Morshower. 

In this scene, Millennium Group profiler Frank Black (Lance Henriksen) faces the beginning of a prophetically catastrophic viral flare-up, managing the guile of the Group's foresight of, and readiness for, such an occasion. 

The scene's content experienced a few varieties, coming to fruition after arrangement maker Chris Carter recommended slaughtering off the character of Catherine Black (Megan Gallagher). The scene has earned positive reactions from faultfinders, and was seen by around 4.8 million families amid its underlying communicate. 

Proceeding from "The Fourth Horseman", a few Millennium Group individuals in biohazard suits get out a house loaded with bodies, casualties of a viral flare-up; outside, many winged animal carcasses litter the ground. 

Gathering part Frank Black (Lance Henriksen) returns home with his better half Catherine (Megan Gallagher) and little girl Jordan (Brittany Tiplady). Dark understands that the family home holds excruciating recollections and chooses to discover elsewhere to settle; the post that day contains a deed from his late dad, who had left him a lodge in the forested areas. Afterward, Blacks meets with Richard Gilbert (Glenn Morshower), who is attempting to persuade Black to join his corporate security firm. Dark reaffirms his responsibility to the Group, in any case, Gilbert cautions that their lives might be compromised by the Group's exercises. The following day, Black discovers that Gilbert passed on in a fender bender; he trusts the vehicle may have been altered. 

Afterward, individual Group part Peter Watts (Terry O'Quinn) reveals to Black that he has revealed PC documents from the Group, showing that an infection found by bio-weapons researchers in the Soviet Union has been living lethargic in feathered creature species since the finish of the Cold War, and may now make a resurgence in the United States. Watts uncovers that an immunization has been created by the Group, yet just in adequate amounts for its individuals; Watts and Black have just been vaccinated without having acknowledged at the time. Dark advises Watts to find Lara Means (Kristen Cloke), another Group part, as he would like to guard them in the lodge until the emergency settle. 

Watts touches base at Means' home, yet is faced by other Group individuals and ambushed. Means is inside, encountering a drawn out mind flight. She thinks about suicide, rather composing something and fixing it in an envelope. Dark discovers her home, joined by paramedics who remove her. She gives Black the envelope—containing a phial of vaccine—and he expresses gratitude toward her, unfit to find the end result for Watts. 

Dark takes his family to the forest lodge, where he and Catherine choose that the portion of immunization ought to be given to Jordan. Dark and Catherine talk about how they would deal with disease; Catherine requests to be euthanized, Black states he would stray to bite the dust alone. That night, Catherine awakens, encountering side effects of the ailment. She unobtrusively leaves the lodge and strolls into the timberland. The following morning, Black awakens, and discovering blood on Catherine's cushion, acknowledges she has gone. He supports his girl as the screen flashes pictures of the breakdown of society, scattered with video commotion. 

"The Time Is Now" was composed by regular associates Glen Morgan and James Wong. The pair would pen a sum of fifteen scenes all through the arrangement's run. The pair had additionally played the jobs of co-official makers for the season. "The Time Is Now" was coordinated by Thomas J. Wright, who helmed a sum of twenty-six scenes over every one of the three seasons. Wright would likewise proceed to coordinate "Thousand years", the arrangement's hybrid scene with its sister show "The X-Files". 

The scene's content experienced a few unique forms before a last plot was settled on, as Morgan and Wong trusted the arrangement would not be recharged for a third season and wished to compose an appropriate consummation. The choice to execute off the character of Catherine Black depended on a proposal by Chris Carter, the arrangement's maker. Morgan and Wong talked about the thought with performing artist Megan Gallagher, who felt that it was a fascinating choice to have Catherine give her life in the wake of seeing Frank Black penance such a great amount for their family all through the past scenes. Depicting a prophetically calamitous situation similar to the aftereffect of an infection originated from Morgan's examination into conceivable apocalypse situations, and was impacted by the episode of ox-like spongiform encephalopathy in the United Kingdom. 

"The Time Is Now" was first communicated on the Fox organize on May 15, 1998. The scene earned a Nielsen rating of 4.9 amid its unique communicate, implying that of families in the United States saw the scene. This spoke to roughly families, and left the scene the seventy-second most-saw communicate that week. 

"The Time Is Now" gotten positive audits from commentators. "The A.V. Club" Todd VanDerWerff appraised the episode—along with the previous scene "The Fourth Horseman—an "A". VanDerWerff felt that it "might be one of the four or five best true to life delineations of the apocalypse at any point shot", adulating the exceptional methodology of portraying the world closure, as opposed to simply demonstrating the result. Bill Gibron, composing for DVD Talk, evaluated the scene 5 out of 5. Gibron felt that the two-section scenes were "a one-two punch that numerous emotional arrangement would kick the bucket for", finding the end to have been successfully alluded to all through the season. Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson, in their book "Needing to Believe: A Critical Guide to The X-Files, Millennium and The Lone Gunmen", evaluated "The Time Is Now" five stars out of five. Shearman felt that the scene would have been "the best end to the show conceivable", had the arrangement not created a third season. He considered the scene's composition and determination to have been a daring choice, conceivably distancing its watchers yet delivering "an exciting and exceptional bit of TV"; he likewise believed the season all in all to be less predictable however more brave than the primary season.