Bronwen Knox 

Bronwen Knox (brought into the world 16 April 1986 in Brisbane, Queensland) is an Australian water polo focus back/focus forward. She went to Hartwick College and Griffith University, winning a Bachelor of Biomedical Science, and fills in as a research center right hand. She began playing water polo when she was fourteen. She played for the National Water Polo League's Queensland Breakers before changing to the Victorian Tigers for the 2012 season. In 2013–14 season she played for the Greek powerhouse Olympiacos in the European rivalries, winning the LEN Trophy. 

She has spoken to Australia as an individual from Australia ladies' national water polo group on both the lesser and senior dimensions. She has won the gold decoration at the 2006 FINA World Cup, the silver award at the 2007 World Championship, the 2010 FINA World Cup and the 2010 FINA World League, and the bronze decoration at the 2008 Summer Olympics and the 2008 FINA World League. She was an individual from the Australia ladies' Olympic group that won a bronze award in the 2012 Summer Olympics in London. 

Knox was conceived on 16 April 1986 in Brisbane, Queensland. Her granddad was William Knox, an unmistakable Queensland government official. Her folks are Andrew and Helen, and she has four kin named Kirsty, Tom, Hamish and Meredith. Her folks and kin were in Beijing to watch her success a bronze decoration at the 2008 Summer Olympics. She is tall, gauges , is correct given and has a tattoo including the Olympic rings. She lives in Brisbane, Queensland, and has lived in Windsor, Queensland. 

Knox went to Hartwick College in New York on a water polo grant, and Griffith University, where she earned a Bachelor of Biomedical Science. She right now fills in as a research facility associate. 

Knox plays focus back/focus forward and likes to wear top number six. She began playing water polo as a fourteen-year-old for a neighborhood Brisbane side. She has filled in as an individual from the Australian Water Polo Athlete's Commission. 

Knox played club water polo for the Queensland Breakers in the Australian National Water Polo League. She was with the group in 2007, 2008 and 2009. The yearly match between the KFC Breakers and the Barracudas is considered by "The Courier-Mail" as a battle. She partook in the 2008 diversion with her group. In 2010, they played in the finals competition, and she was named to the association finals' All Star group. , she plays for the Victorian Tigers in a similar class. 

In 2013–14 season she played for the Greek powerhouse Olympiacos in the European rivalries, winning the LEN Trophy. Knox was the legend of the last against (10–9), scoring Olympiacos' triumphant objective with a dynamite shot with just 23 seconds to go. 

Knox has spoken to Australia at the lesser national dimension. In 2002, she was an individual from the national youth young ladies group that visited the United States in June, and contended in a universal arrangement in Sydney in August. In 2004, she was an individual from the group that visited Europe in July and August. She was an individual from Australia's lesser national group in 2005, and she was on the lesser side that contended in the VI FINA World Junior Championships in Perth in January of that year. The group crushed Greece 10–4 for the bronze decoration, with its solitary misfortune a 4–5 misfortune to the United States. 

Knox is an individual from the Australia ladies' national water polo group, nicknamed the Stingers. She got her first call up to Australia's senior group to contend at the 2005 World Championships in Canada, where she scored her first universal objective in her first amusement, which was against Germany. In 2006, she was a piece of the gold decoration winning side at the FINA World Cup in Tianjin, China, and the silver award winning group at the World Championships in Melbourne in 2007. 

Knox was a piece of Australia's Oceania Olympic capability battle in 2008. In a 18–1 triumph over New Zealand amid the qualifiers, she scored three objectives. In 2008, Knox was named to the group that contended at the FINA world class fundamental round in Tianjin, China, and contended in the Women's International Series. In a 2008 Asia-Oceania qualifier against China for the World League Super Finals, she played in the 11–9 success that went to a punishment shoot out, scoring three of the objectives for Australia. The World League Finals were held in Spain, and Australia at last brought home a bronze decoration. 

Knox was the skipper of the group that won a bronze decoration at the 2008 Summer Olympics in Beijing. Her group wound up in the bronze decoration coordinate in the wake of losing 8–9 to the United States in the semi finals and playing against Hungary for the bronze. Prior in the Olympics, her group had tied with the Hungarians. 

In 2009, Knox was an individual from a group that contended at the FINA World Championships. She played in the semi-finals diversion against New Zealand that Australia won 14–4, scoring four objectives. Knox was the commander of the national group in December 2010 and May 2011. In February 2010, she went to a national group preparing camp in the Gold Coast in anticipation of the group's appearance at the April Commonwealth Championships. In May 2010, she was an individual from the group that contended at the FINA World League Asia-Oceania zone held in Osaka, Japan, and Tianjin, China. She proceeded to contend in the FINA World League Finals in La Jolla, California, and Australia brought home a silver decoration. 

In August 2010, Knox was an individual from the Australian national side at a preparation camp at the Australian Institute of Sport. Amid the camp, she took part in a progression of scrimmages against the United States. That month, she likewise spoken to Australia at the Six Nations Cup that was held in Sydney. She was an individual from the Stingers squad that contended in the 2010 FINA World Cup. She was again the skipper amid this competition, and on the second day of the challenge, helped lead her group to a 7–5 triumph of the United States. She contended Australia's 10–8 annihilation of Russia. Her mentor was cited in "The Age" about her execution in the match, saying "Bronwen Knox was astounding at focus back and the weight enabled us to get takes and counter-assaults." In the group's 10–8 last triumph over the United States, she scored two objectives. In April 2011, she went to a preparation camp at the Australian Institute of Sport where the mentor was "choosing a group for the significant titles over winter." In 2011, she was one of five Queensland ladies to seek the Australian Stingers in the FINA World League rivalry held in Auckland, New Zealand. In a May 2011 match against China, she scored three objectives in a 9–7 amusement that saw Australia score six objectives in the second time frame. 

In July 2011, Knox was an individual from the Australian Stingers that contended in the 2011 FINA World Championships in Shanghai as a field player. In anticipation of this competition, she went to a group preparing camp in Perth, Western Australia. She contended in the Pan Pacific Championships in January 2012 for the Australian Stingers. In February 2012, she was named to an individual from the 2012 Summer Olympics preparing squad. The group of seventeen players will be sliced to thirteen preceding the group leaves for the Olympic recreations, with the declaration being made on 13 June. She was a piece of the Stingers squad that contended in a five-amusement test against Great Britain at the AIS in late February 2012. This was the group's first matches against Great Britain's national group in six years. In the principal round of the test arrangement on 21 February 2012 that Australia won 13–5, she scored three objectives. 

Against Hungary, Knox missed the punishment that killed from the 2016 Summer Olympics.