Strang School District No. 36 

Strang School District No. 36, or the Strang Public School, is a noteworthy school situated in Fillmore County, Nebraska, in the town of Strang. The school is one of the two destinations recorded on the National Register of Historic Places in the town of Strang. The school building is a little, two-story, block open school building, which was worked to supplant the school building that was recently situated on that site. The school building was worked somewhere in the range of 1929 and 1930, and supplanted the past school building, which torched in 1928. The school building still holds all unique structure materials. The school served secondary school understudies from 1930 to 1951, and still capacities as a school today, serving grades K–8. The NRHP posting likewise incorporates a flagpole situated outside the school building, and five bits of play area hardware. 

In October 1928 a flame decimated the little school that had recently been situated in Strang. Classes were held in two nearby holy places and the Belle Prairie Township Hall for the rest of that year, while the townspeople held a progression of gatherings to talk about the development of another school building. Later in 1928, plans for the new school building were drawn up and endorsed, and development on the new Strang Public School started in 1929. Most of the general population that chipped away at developing the school were nearby townspeople. The primary classes in the new school were held in February 1930. The school building was built in a "flame resistant" style, as to anticipate another mishap. The new school building was developed to hold understudies from first through twelfth grades, from Strang and the encompassing networks. Essential understudies going to classes were situated on the second floor and auxiliary understudies classes were hung on the main floor. Since development, there have been no undertakings embraced to repair or reestablish the first structure, as to secure its recorded significance. In 1951, because of a decrease in enlistment, the school diminished to serving only understudies in evaluations K through 8, and has remained along these lines since. In fall of 2001, the school had an enlistment of only eight understudies. By the fall of 2004 (the last distributed figures accessible), that number had tumbled to only five. 

The Strang Public School is a close ideal case of what is viewed as a run of the mill twentieth-century "flame resistant" school building in Nebraska, and is developed to some degree symmetrically. The school was developed in a rearranged adaptation of the Renaissance Revival style, comprising of two stories, with a level rooftop. 

The structure is developed in a rectangular shape, symmetrical on the outside, and measures by . The rough tallness estimations are not given by the Register. Substantial, six more than six paned windows are situated in the front and the back of the structure on the two stories. Comparative windows are additionally situated on the south side of the structure, however just on the top floor. There are no windows situated on the north side. The whole outside of the structure is built from block. The rooftop is level and built of material concrete, with a parapet situated around it, with an area of a stack that stands out of the south end of the rooftop. The most noticeable component of the outside of the structure is the extensive, focal structure, with a ventured peak parapet divider. 

The main dimension of the structure contains two homerooms, the two of which have a cloakroom, a lot of three swivel entryways, and an expansive slate writing slate that covers one of the dividers. The main story likewise contains two washrooms, four little stockpiling storage rooms, and a focal corridor, just as an expansive stairwell paving the way to the second floor. The second story contains three study halls, with indistinguishable highlights from those down the stairs, alongside an office and three little extra spaces. A metal emergency exit entryway is situated in the focal point of the west mass of the second story. The school building likewise has a halfway storm cellar, which contains an expansive extra space, a coal room, and a neglected coal heater. 

The Strang Public School is situated at the convergence of Main Street and Sharon Street, on the southern edge of Strang, initially arranged as a helpful area for the educators and understudies originating from encompassing networks. The grounds comprises of the principle school building, five memorable bits of play area hardware, a flagpole situated before the structure, a ball/tennis court found north of the school building, and an expansive playing field west of the school building. The whole property is contained inside a 300 by 300 foot square plot of land. 

A flagpole is situated outside the fundamental access to the school fabricating, and is incorporated into the NRHP posting as a contributing element. A lot of rec center bars, a tie ball post, a swing set, an "elusive slide", and a carousel are situated on the south and west sides of the property, and are altogether recorded as contributing highlights. A fenced tennis and b-ball court is situated on the north side of the property, and an extensive track and playing field are situated on the west side of the property, yet none of these highlights are incorporated into the posting. 

Strang School District No. 36 was added to the National Register of Historic Places on June 25, 1992. On its designation, Strang School District No. 36 was refered to as being noteworthy under criteria C, with the announcement: "as a multi-story, block, "flame resistant" school assembling, a case of a sort, period, and strategy for development illustrative of school structures built in numerous networks in Nebraska, especially in Fillmore County, amid the primary quarter of the twentieth century". The school's recorded year of importance was 1930, the year it was built. The school is viewed as noteworthy to the encompassing network by Fillmore County, because of its significance to training a notable characteristics, being one of the most established structures in the territory. 

Book index