The Don (Nas tune) 

"The Don" is a tune by American rapper Nas. Discharged as the second single from his tenth studio collection, "Life Is Good" (2012), it is delivered by record makers Da Internz, Heavy D and Salaam Remi, who all composed the tune alongside Nas, albeit Heavy D kicked the bucket before the tune could be done. Worked around an example of "Move in New York" by reggae vocalist Super Cat, a previous teammate of Nas, "The Don" is upheld by a blast bap, reggae-tinged generation with extra drum and piano sounds. Melodiously, Nas endeavors to reaffirm his status as a "road artist", tending to the hardships of neediness inside distraught social orders and the substances of weapon and medication issues. 

"The Don" was discharged to advanced retailers on April 3, 2012. Despite the fact that the tune was not monetarily effective, outlining just in the lower locales of the UK Singles Chart, it got approval from music commentators, a large number of whom adulated Nas' rapping style and verses, particularly the sensible persona he passed on. Some likewise articulated themselves inspired with Nas' inspiration at such a point in his long profession. A music video for "The Don", coordinated by Aristotle Torres, was debuted on April 27, 2012, which endeavors to show a few parts of Nas' way of life, including performing at shows, just as his encounters in New York City, his place of living arrangement. 

"The Don" was delivered by Da Internz, Heavy D and Salaam Remi – the last a normal associate with Nas on a significant number of his past melodies, including the singles "I Can" and "Made You Look". Overwhelming D initially displayed the tune "Move in New York", by reggae artist Super Cat to Remi in the conviction that Remi could make an "insane" creation on the off chance that he could pick a suitable piece of the tune to test and alter. Nas, who had worked with Super Cat before in his profession, guaranteed that Super Cat really referenced him in "Move in New York" on his first tuning in of the melody. Remi started to attempt and alter the tune, and set up together the bassline that would in the long run be utilized on "The Don", yet couldn't work with the example that he had been given widely: in the wake of learning the character of the first maker of "Move in New York", Jah Thomas, he paid Thomas as a byproduct of utilization of the tune's multitrack. 

Remi kept on chipping away at the generation while likewise assembling material for the after death Amy Winehouse collection "" (2011) in London: while there, he learnt of Heavy D's ongoing demise, urging him to finish the creation for "The Don". After Nas got the melody, he mentioned that creation pair Da Internz chip away at "The Don" and alter it further before it would be rapped over. In a meeting with "XXL", Da Internz called it "a respect that you wouldn't accept" to have taken a shot at the melody once they was aware of Heavy D's inclusion in its origination, as they had wished to work with him before he kicked the bucket: they likewise lauded Nas' demeanor in the chronicle studio, depicting "his bars [and] his methodology" as "simply uncommon". Following the tune's finishing, radio plate racer Funkmaster Flex debuted "The Don" on the New York City radio station Hot 97 on March 15, 2012; Def Jam Recordings later discharged it to computerized retailers on April 3, 2012. 

"The Don" was composed by Nasir Jones, Dwight Myers, Salaam Gibbs, Marcos Palacios and Ernest Clark, and created by Myers under his generation name Heavy D, Gibbs under his generation name Salaam Remi, and Palacios and Clark under their creation name Da Internz. Gibbs likewise given extra bass sounds in the tune's creation. The tune was recorded by Gleyder Disla at Instrument Zoo Studios and by Brian Summer at Conway Recording Studios – recording studios in Miami, Florida and Hollywood, California individually. Reggae craftsmen Super Cat and Jah Thomas are credited as journalists on "The Don", as an example of the tune "Move in New York", which the pair composed together, is inserted in "The Don". Sound blending was completed by Jaycen Joshua at Larrabee Studios in Hollywood, California, with extra vocals being given by Red Alert. "The Don" was aced by Chris Gehringer at Sterling Sound, New York City. 

"The Don" is a hip bounce tune of three minutes and two seconds long. It starts with the primary utilization of an example of "Move in New York" by Super Cat, utilized as a methods for clarifying the significance of music to less fortunate networks. Following this present, Nas' verses are upheld by a "breezy", blast bap-orientated creation, made by makers Da Internz, Heavy D and Salaam Remi, containing impacts of reggae, while likewise including an unmistakable "bass crash", staccato drum and piano break – comparative in style to a significant part of the generation highlighted on Nas' introduction collection, "Illmatic" (1994). Different pieces of "Move in New York" are mixed into the tune's generation all through. An analyst for DJBooth felt that the generation shared an antiquated stylish with Nas' past single, "Frightful", taking note of that "The Don" "shares its predecessor’s smudged, old fashioned educated yet forward-looking feel". Ken Capobianco had comparative suppositions about the melody's style, seeing that it "evoke[s] the sound and feel of New York’s '90s hip-bounce prime". Henry Adaso of About.com noticed Nas' verses as steady with his persona of a "road artist", composing that "there are firearm dangers, vehicle gloats, musings of housetop sex, shoutouts to New York rap pioneers, and references to genuine medication rings". As indicated by "Moving Stone" essayist Simon Vozick-Levinson, Nas "deftly" addresses his prior life by depicting "a brief picture of the craftsman as a young fellow". Overwhelming D, who kicked the bucket before the tune was completely finished, is likewise referenced by Nas in the tune's verses, where he takes note of that Heavy D was the person who thought of the generation and the thoughts behind it before he indicated it to Remi. 

"The Don" got all inclusive recognition from music pundits, with Nas' verses drawing specific applause. Rico Barrino of Artistdirect applauded Nas' rapping as having the capacity to awe in various settings, calling his verses "both snappy and directing" and noticed his "exact, strong expressive verse sharpened by 20 years in the amusement". Composing for MTV News, Rob Markman called the generation "a sonic takeoff" from Nas' past work, however complimented his verses as "vintage" and brought up the consistency of the expressive quality all through the tune. In his survey of "The Don" for About.com, Henry Adaso portrayed the tune as "the kind of expressive exercise Nas just tosses down more than once per collection", and that melodies, for example, "The Don" gave a case for Nas' consideration "as one of hip-jump's untouched greats", additionally grabbing on his "guaranteed" gloats and the "peaceful certainty" encompassed in his tone. Adaso likewise communicated a positive reaction towards the tune's creation, communicating his unexpected that having three distinct makers chipping away at the tune had not prompted an "instance of an excessive number of cooks in the kitchen", composing that "rather, we get a durable, hard-hitting, face-liquefying, reggae-tinged beat". An analyst of the tune for DJBooth composed of Nas' execution as "at turns insightful, compromising and braggadocious", and commended the generation's "urgently head-noddable score". In their audit of "Life Is Good", Sputnikmusic prescribed "The Don" to first-time audience members of Nas, expressing to be a display of Nas' "inconceivable melodious structures" and "how quickly this person can punch out the syllables". They additionally noted it as a "difference in pace" from the more downtempo material on "Life Is Good". In his audit of "Life Is Good" for "Prefix Magazine", Charlie Kaplan called "The Don" the collection's "reasonable feature" and felt it a fitting tribute to Heavy D's life and work, composing that it "raises a glass to the as of late withdrawn overweight darling with a clear voyage through New York rap's exemplary soundscapes". For the outline week dated July 28, 2012, "The Don" appeared on the UK Singles Chart at number 196. 

A music video for "The Don" was shot in New York City, and coordinated by Aristotle Torres. On April 18, 2012, a 30-second limited time clasp of the video was discharged on the web, which contained shots of high rises and Nas being escorted out of a horde of gathering goers into a white Rolls-Royce. Designs at that point show up, reporting the imminent arrival of the full video. 

The video starts with a dose of a yacht out on water, which at that point segues to a picture of the Statue of Liberty: the words "Nas" and "The Don" have been superimposed in mid-air on the left and right-hand sides of the statue individually. After rapidly moving between different pictures of New York City, Nas is appeared at a table at an outside eatery with a female, so, all things considered he raps the opening verses of the melody. Once more, the video moves quickly between pictures, this time tending to Nas' way of life, with shots of shades, coats and shirts all highlighted. Without further ado following this, Nas is escorted into a white Rolls Royce, wearing a white suit. He is then appeared in a ring of flame set up on the ground, while proceeding to discuss verses from the tune. 

The video at that point keeps on switching back and forth between three unique settings: Nas' adventure in the Rolls Royce, amid which he is driven around New York; him remaining in the ring of flame, performing verses from the melody; and him sitting in a club, encompassed by a few ladies, additionally performing verses from the tune. High contrast shots are then appeared of Nas performing at a show, with numerous fans indicated supporting him. At long last, the video closes with a few airborne shots of New York City, and a picture of the letter "N" consumed into the ground. 

Nas initially played out "The Don" live on March 18, 2012, as a component of a set uncommonly sorted out by video administration Vevo at the music celebration South by Southwest. At the 2012 ESPY Awards, Nas played out "The Don" as a major aspect of a variety of melodies from "Life Is Good", including "Dreadful" and "Summer on Smash", the last which he performed with rapper and maker Swizz Beatz. On July 17, 2012, as a feature of an appearance on the mocking TV program "The Colbert Report", Nas performed both "The Don" and the single "Little girls", a melody which additionally shows up on "Life Is Good". 

The credits for "The Don" are adjusted from the liner notes of "Life Is Good".