2009 Women's Cricket World Cup Final 

The 2009 Women's Cricket World Cup Final was a cricket coordinate between New Zealand and England played on 22 March 2009 at the North Sydney Oval in Australia. It was the zenith of the 2009 Women's Cricket World Cup, the ninth Women's Cricket World Cup. Britain won the last by four wickets, securing their third World Cup title and their first outside England. It was the second time that the two groups had met at this phase of a World Cup – England won their past definite challenge in 1993. 

In the wake of winning the hurl, New Zealand commander Haidee Tiffen picked to bat first. Her side were bowled out in 47.2 overs for a sum of 166 runs. All-rounder Lucy Doolan, batting at number nine, was the most noteworthy scorer for New Zealand with 48. Britain bowler Nicky Shaw took a profession best four wickets for 34 runs. In their reaction, England assembled an opening organization of 74 runs and kept on scoring relentlessly. In spite of consistently losing wickets, they achieved the triumphant aggregate with 23 balls to save, procuring England their first World Cup title for a long time. Shaw, who had at first not been incorporated into the England group, was named player of the match in the wake of supplanting the harmed Jenny Gunn only minutes before the beginning of the match. 

New Zealand were attracted Group An of the challenge, alongside the West Indies, South Africa and their "customary opponents" Australia. They began their battle against Australia. Haidee Tiffen scored a mindful 50 years for New Zealand, however her rejection set off a breakdown in which the group lost seven wickets for the expansion of 34 runs. In their answer, Australia routinely lost wickets, and a six over bowling spell by Kate Pulford, in which she took three wickets for 30 runs, moderated the run pursue. After an underlying precipitation postpone held up the amusement, a second storm completed the match, with Australia 13 runs short by the Duckworth–Lewis strategy. Tiffen missed New Zealand's second match, against the West Indies, with damage, and Aimee Mason assigned as commander. For the second time in the same number of matches, New Zealand endured a breakdown, losing their initial six wickets for 104 runs. A seventh-wicket association of 57 among Mason and Sarah Tsukigawa helped New Zealand to stay focused in the match, and they finished their 50 overs with 192 runs. As per "Cricinfo", the West Indian answer "was without force". Turn bowlers Mason and Lucy Doolan took three wickets each to constrain the West Indies to 136 keeps running for the loss of eight wickets from their overs. In their last gathering stage coordinate, New Zealand guaranteed that they won the gathering with a major win over South Africa. Amy Satterthwaite, Sara McGlashan and Nicola Browne all scored half-hundreds of years as their group achieved an aggregate of 250 for five. South Africa battled in their pursuit: just Cri-Zelda Brits achieved twofold figures in an innings overwhelmed by the bowling of Mason and Suzie Bates, who gathered four wickets each. 

Britain were set in Group B, close by India, Pakistan and Sri Lanka. In their first challenge, against Sri Lanka, they scored 277 runs, helped by a 95-ball century from Claire Taylor, and 50 years via Caroline Atkins. Sri Lanka batted their full assignment of overs, yet lost by 100 runs. Laura Marsh took three wickets, and three of the Sri Lankan batsmen were run out in their pursuit. Following the match, Jenny Gunn's bowling activity was accounted for to the International Cricket Council (ICC) as being possibly unlawful, yet she was cleared a couple of days after the fact. Britain confronted India in their second match, in a challenge charged as the fight for top spot in the gathering. Britain won the match effectively, bowling India out for 169; with Gunn and Holly Colvin each taking three wickets, and unbeaten half-hundreds of years from both Atkins and Claire Taylor. Another expansive success, over Pakistan, ensured England completed as gathering victors. Swamp took a vocation best five wickets to help bowl Pakistan out for only 78 runs, a complete which her side came to in under portion of their permitted overs. 

Britain and New Zealand met each other in the primary match of the Super Sixes. Britain batted first, and notwithstanding being 96 for four at one phase, 57 keeps running from chief Charlotte Edwards, and a fast 22 keeps running from Gunn, helped their side recoup to post an aggregate of 201 for five. Accordingly, New Zealand started emphatically, and were helped by 50 years from their commander, Tiffen, however the turn bowling of Edwards, Marsh and Colvin controlled the run rate, and New Zealand were in the end bowled out for 170, Edwards taking four wickets. Britain's following match was against the West Indies, and they by and by outperformed 200 pursues batting first. Sarah Taylor, Claire Taylor and Atkins all scored half-hundreds of years to impel England to their aggregate of 236 for eight. The English bowlers at that point expelled the West Indies for 90 runs, with Marsh gathering three wickets. The success verified England a spot in the last, independent of the outcome in their last match against Australia. 

In their second match, New Zealand confronted an Indian side which had beaten Australia in their first Super Six challenge. India batted first and scored 207, amid an innings in which they lost four batsmen to run outs. New Zealand started their reaction well, putting on an association of 78 keeps running for the primary wicket among Pulford and Tiffen. After Tiffen's rejection, Bates bolstered Pulford, who in the long run succumbed to 71 runs, and New Zealand achieved their objective with 14 balls to save. New Zealand set a record organization for the second wicket in ladies' ODIs in their last match: Bates scored 168 and Tiffen 100 as the pair set up on 262 runs together. Bates played a forceful innings, scoring her keeps running from 105 balls, including 6 sixes and 19 fours. New Zealand achieved 373 from their overs, and bowled Pakistan out for 150, giving themselves a 223 run triumph, and fitting the bill for the last. Britain were defeated by Australia in their last Super Six match: Shelley Nitschke hindered the run rate amid her bowling, taking two wickets and limiting England to only fourteen keeps running from her ten overs. Britain were bowled out for 161, an all out Australia pursued down inside 34 overs. 

Preceding the beginning of the challenge, Jenny Roesler of "Cricinfo" proposed England and New Zealand, alongside Australia, as the top choices to win the challenge. The last was a rehash of the 1993 last, when England succeeded at Lord's. The two sides had won the World Cup already, yet just while facilitating the competition. New Zealand accomplished the accomplishment in 2000, while England were victors in both 1973 and 1993. Notwithstanding losing the 1993 last to England, New Zealand were additionally finalists in 1997, losing to Australia in India. Britain had challenged five past finals; losing to Australia in consequent competitions in 1978, 1982 and 1988. Britain all-rounder Gunn irritated a calf-strain amid the warm-up, and was supplanted by the group's bad habit chief Nicky Shaw, who had recently been overlooked from the side. Huw Richards, composing for the "Global Herald Tribune", portrayed both England and New Zealand as commendable finalists, and noticed that he was baffled with the execution of Australia, who completed fourth. 

The last was played on "a wonderfully bright day" at the North Sydney Oval, a multi-reason arena in North Sydney, New South Wales. The ground had facilitated various matches before in the competition, and amid the 1988 Women's Cricket World Cup, however has never facilitated men's universal cricket. The match, played before 2,300 individuals, started at 10:00 AEDT, with a booked lunch interim from 13.10 to 13.55. Steve Davis, of Australia, and the South African Brian Jerling were named as the on-field umpires for the match. Davis was an individual from the Elite Panel of ICC Umpires, the most noteworthy assignment for an umpire, while Jerling was on the International Panel of Umpires and Referees, the following most senior assignment. Tyron Wijewardena and Jeff Brookes satisfied the off-field jobs of third and fourth umpires separately, and Brian Aldridge filled in as match ref. Aldridge had recently umpired the 1992 Cricket World Cup Final. 

Notwithstanding conditions helpful for swing bowling, New Zealand's chief, Tiffen, batted first in the wake of winning the hurl. Britain opened the bowling with crease from one end, given by Katherine Brunt, and turn at the other, from Isa Guha. Brunt's bowling spell was depicted by the BBC's Aimee Lewis as "heavenly", and partner Shaw acknowledged her for putting the New Zealand batsmen under strain. New Zealand advanced to 46 for the loss of simply the opener Pulford, before England made their first bowling change. The England bad habit chief, Shaw, was expedited, and had a quick effect. From her third ball, Bates confounded an endeavored space over mid-on, and was gotten by Atkins. The accompanying ball, Satterthwaite fell for a duck, edging an outswinging conveyance to the wicket-guardian, Sarah Taylor. Four overs later, Tiffen was likewise expelled by Shaw, giving a thick edge to Sarah Taylor. Albeit center request batsmen McGlashan and Mason both got begins, New Zealand crumbled to 101 for seven. Doolan joined Browne at the wrinkle, and the pair gave their side some level of a recuperation: Doolan scored 48 keeps running in an association of 63 to push New Zealand to their aggregate of 166. After the expulsion of Doolan, who was confused off a wide conveyance, New Zealand died down quickly, losing their last two wickets for only two additional runs. "The New Zealand Herald" censured the batting as being "apathetic", however Richards credited England for their "tight bowling and handling" to limit New Zealand. 

In their reaction, England started unquestionably: opening batsmen Atkins and Sarah Taylor fabricated an association bigger than any overseen by New Zealand, scoring 74 keeps running before the expulsion of Taylor for 39. Atkins played a more patient innings than Taylor, and scored the most keeps running for her side, gathering 40 from 85 balls. Claire Taylor went to the wrinkle upon Sarah Taylor's rejection and played with a comparative assaulting expectation, striking four limits amid her 21 keeps running before she was bowled by Mason. Britain's center request endured their own breakdown against the restriction turn bowlers Doolan and Mason, their scoring rate abating essentially from 4.78 runs per over toward the finish of the fourteenth over to 3.58 twenty overs later. Edwards was given out in the wake of being gotten by wicket-attendant Rachel Priest for 10 runs, however she didn't really hit the ball. Regardless of their battles through the center overs, Richards opined that "Britain never looked like losing." It was Shaw who indeed excited England, batting with a more assaulting style than those that had battled before her. Her score of 17 not out pushed England towards the triumphant target, and a solitary from Colvin protected triumph for England with 23 balls staying in the innings. Shaw's commitment earnt her the player of the match honor. 

Match authorities 

Key 

The ICC granted England US$45,000 for their glass win, while New Zealand got $25,000. The group of the competition included seven finalists: England's Edwards was chosen as chief, and was joined by partners Brunt, Marsh, Claire Taylor and Sarah Taylor. Bates and Pulford spoke to New Zealand in the group, while Sophie Devine was named as the group's twelfth lady. Claire Taylor, who completed the competition as the main run-scorer, was named as the Player of the Tournament. The month after the last, Taylor turned into the principal lady to be chosen as one of "Wisden's" Cricketers of the Year. 

The opposite sides met again three months after the fact to challenge the last of the 2009 Women's World Twenty20. Britain by and by won the challenge, and in doing as such turned into the primary group of either sex to be champions in each of the three cricketing positions: Test, One Day International and Twenty20. Every one of the best four in the 2009 competition consequently met all requirements for the 2013 Women's Cricket World Cup. Neither England nor New Zealand achieved the last of that competition, yet rather met in the third-place playoff, which England won by four wickets.