Europa and the Pirate Twins 

"Europa and the Pirate Twins" is a melody by English craftsman Thomas Dolby, from his 1982 collection "The Golden Age of Wireless". Composed by Dolby, who created it close by Tim Friese-Greene, the tune was discharged as a solitary on 3Â October 1981. 

The tune, depicted as a "synth pop exemplary", was enlivened by the environment of World WarÂ II, and highlights a visitor appearance by XTC's Andy Partridge. The single achieved a pinnacle position of 48 in the United Kingdom, Dolby's nation of origin, just as graphing in the United States and Canada. 

Taken from the collection "The Golden Age of Wireless", "Europa and the Pirate Twins" was composed by Thomas Dolby, who created it in a joint effort with Tim Friese-Greene. The tune opens with a "soul-filled" harmonica solo, performed by Andy Partridge of the band XTC. The tune utilizes electronic drums, and highlights a "high-register" synthesizer line all through. The melody's fundamental melodic snare is a "Bo Diddley beat", a dull cadence basic in a few melodic kinds. 

Suffocated in Sound's Joseph Stannard has noticed that "Europa and the Pirate Twins" is composed with World WarÂ II as a solid impact, and that the tune "accentuates the short separation between [Dolby's] age and the one which persevered through the last worldwide clash". Dolby has depicted the melody, alongside the tone of the collection, as mirroring "a feeling of [a] relationship that is going on as being overpowered by something on a more terrific dimension", including that "there's a solid wartime environment to it". The melody was depicted as "a semi-self-portraying cavort" in the liner notes for Dolby's 2009 biggest hits collection "The Singular Thomas Dolby", the arrival of which was regulated by the vocalist. "Europa and the Pirate Twins" got a "continuation" on Dolby's 1992 collection "Space explorers and Heretics", in the tune "Eastern Bloc"; which has been portrayed by "Sound" magazine as "imploringly reliable" to the first. 

"Europa and the Pirate Twins" was discharged as a solitary in the United Kingdom on 3Â October, 1981. It was Dolby's first real name discharge, taken from his EMI-discharged dăšbut collection "The Golden Age of Wireless". The tune went through three weeks in the UK Singles Chart, achieving a pinnacle position of 48. The melody originally showed up in "RPM" magazine's Canadian singles outline on 18 June 1983, appearing at number 50. It in the long run achieved a pinnacle position of 45 in that graph. The melody appeared in the United States' "Announcement" Hot 100 singles outline on 2Â July 1983, going through five weeks there and topping at numberâ 67. It additionally achieved a pinnacle position of 37 on the "Bulletin" shake diagram in 1982. 

The tune's discharge was joined by a music video, mixing together a few components of film. These included film of the Ziegfeld Follies, Dolby cooperating with an advanced "telecomputer", and highly contrasting shots of a Dolby and a covered female figure by the coast. The video was composed and coordinated by Dolby. 

"Europa and the Pirate Twins" has been portrayed by Peter Buckley, in his book "The Rough Guide to Rock", as "showcas[ing] Dolby's trademark mix of the beguiling and the gimmicky". Composing for Allrovi, Stewart Mason depicted the melody as "a hyperactive synth pop great", whose "each alcove and crevice is loaded down with a type of ear-getting snare". Bricklayer included that the melody "pack[s] an amazing measure of detail into two short refrains and a scaffold" and "resolves with a taking off, ambivalent ensemble". Expounding on the melody's music video, Dennis Shin of PopMatters depicted Dolby as being on the "main edge" in the medium, featuring the recordings for "She Blinded Me with Science" and "Hyperactive!" notwithstanding portraying that for "Europa and the Pirate Twins" as being "one of his lesser-known and uncelebrated recordings".