SMS Siegfried 

SMS "Siegfried" was the lead ship of the six-part "Siegfried" class of beach front barrier ships ("Kăźstenpanzerschiffe") worked for the German Imperial Navy. Her sister ships were , and . "Siegfried" was worked by the Germaniawerft shipyard somewhere in the range of 1888 and 1890, and was outfitted with a fundamental battery of three firearms. She served in the German armada all through the 1890s and was revamped in 1903 - 1904. She served in the VI Battle Squadron after the episode of World War I in August 1914, however observed no activity. "Siegfried" was deactivated in 1915 and utilized as a dormitory deliver from that point. She was eventually separated for scrap in 1920. 

"Siegfried" was long by and large and had a light emission a most extreme draft of . She uprooted at full battle load. Her impetus framework comprised of two vertical 3-barrel triple development motors. Steam for the motors was given by four coal-terminated boilers. The ship's drive framework gave a top speed of and a scope of around at . "Siegfried" had a group of 20â officers and 256â enlisted men. 

The ship was furnished with three 24 cm K L/35 firearms mounted in three single weapon turrets. Two were set next to each other forward, and the third was found toward the back of the fundamental superstructure. They were provided with a sum of 204 rounds of ammo. The ship was likewise outfitted with six 8.8â cm SK L/30 firearms in single mounts. "Siegfried" additionally conveyed four torpedo tubes, all in swivel mounts on the deck. One was at the bow, another at the stern, and two amidships. The ship was ensured by a heavily clad belt that was amidships, and a shielded deck that was thick. The conning tower had thick sides. 

"Siegfried" was set down in 1888 at the Germaniawerft shipyard in Kiel. She was propelled on 10 August 1889, and finished on 19 April 1890. She was appointed into the armada on 29 April, and joined the I Division of the German armada, alongside the more seasoned ironclads , and , under "Vizeadmiral" Karl Deinhard. The I Division took part in a few armada moves in 1891, where they commonly filled in as the German side in the war amusements. "Siegfried" did not take an interest in the 1892 moves, having been supplanted in the I Division by her as of late charged sister dispatch . 

Over the winter of 1892 - 1893, "Siegfried" and "Beowulf" joined the old ironclads and for a winter preparing voyage in the Mediterranean Sea. "Siegfried" again sat out the 1893 armada moves, rather than her sister , which had recently joined the armada. In the 1897 moves, "Siegfried" and each of the five of her sister ships framed the III Division. In 1898, "Siegfried" again took an interest in the yearly summer moves in the III Division, alongside "Beowulf" and . Her other three sisters were allocated to the IV Division. Amid the 1900 summer moves, "Siegfried" served in the mimicked antagonistic squadron, nearby , "Hildebrand", and . 

"Siegfried" served on dynamic obligation until 1903, when she was pulled back from administration. Beginning in 1903, she was taken into drydock at the Kaiserliche Werft shipyard in Danzig for a broad reproduction. The ship was extended to , which expanded removal to . Her old boilers were supplanted with eight new Marine sort boilers, and a second pipe was included. Her optional battery was expanded to ten 8.8â cm weapons, and the 35â cm torpedo tubes were supplanted with three cylinders. Work was finished by 1904. 

She was brought back on dynamic obligation at the episode of World War I in August 1914, and activated into the VI Battle Squadron for beach front barrier, alongside her sister ships. On 31 August 1915, the VI Battle Squadron was retired, and "Siegfried"s team was exchanged to different warships. She was then utilized as a sleeping shelter transport in Wilhelmshaven, a job she filled until the finish of the war. On 17 June 1919, she was stricken from the maritime register. The naval force wanted to change over her into a rescue dispatch, however the arrangement was deserted and she was rather sold for 425,000â marks to H. Dwindles in Wewelsfleth. "Siegfried" was separated for scrap the next year in Kiel-Nordmole.