Tonga at the 2012 Summer Olympics 

Tonga partook in the 2012 Summer Olympics in London, United Kingdom, which were held from 27 July to 12 August 2012. The nation's interest in London denoted its eighth appearance in the Summer Olympics since its introduction at the 1984 Summer Olympics. The appointment included three contenders: two in sports, Joseph Andy Lui and ĘťAna Poęťuhila, alongside one short separation swimmer Amini Fonua. The last passage was Tonga's first appearance in Olympic swimming challenge. Lui and Fonua qualified through special case places while Po'uhila made the diversions by gathering capability norms. Fonua was chosen as the banner conveyor for the opening function while Lui held it at the end service. Lui and Fonua neglected to advance more remote than the starter round of their separate occasions while Po'uhila completed 29th in the warmth phase of the ladies' shot put challenge. 

Tonga partook in eight Summer Olympic Games between its introduction at the 1984 Summer Olympics in Los Angeles, United States and the 2012 Summer Olympics in London, England. The nation sent its biggest designation to an Olympic Games with seven to the 1984 Summer Olympics. No Tongan competitor has ever won a decoration at the Olympic Games. Tonga took an interest in the London Summer Games between 27 July to 12 August 2012. The Tongan National Olympic Committee (NOC) chose two competitors through trump card places. More often than not, a NOC would almost certainly enter up to three qualified competitors in every individual occasion as long as every competitor met the "A" standard, or one competitor for each occasion on the off chance that they met the "B" standard. In any case, since Tonga had no competitors that satisfied either guideline, they were permitted to choose two competitors, one of every sex, as trump cards. 

The three competitors that were chosen by Tonga to contend at the London Games were Joseph Andy Lui in the men's 100 meters, ĘťAna Poęťuhila in the ladies' shot put challenge and Amini Fonua in the men's 100 meter breaststroke. The nation's male Olympic football crew neglected to qualify in the wake of being crushed by New Zealand 10-0 in their last gathering stage coordinate in the OFC Men's Olympic Qualifying Tournament. Alongside the three competitors, the nation's appointment was driven by its gourmet specialist de mission Ahongalu Fusimalohi. Fonwa was chosen as the banner conveyor for the opening service while Lui held it at the end function. Fusimalochi said in June 2012 that the group trusted ten competitors would be qualified, however after that did not happen, he expected that the contender's execution in London will rouse members who needed to contend at the 2016 Summer Olympics in Rio de Janeiro. 

At 20 years old, Joseph Andy Lui was the most youthful individual to speak to Tonga at the London Games. He had not partaken in any past Olympic Games, Lui met all requirements for the Games by utilizing a trump card since his quickest time of 10.82 seconds, set at the 2011 Oceania Athletics Championships, was 0.58 seconds slower than the "B" qualifying standard for his occasion, the men's 100 meters. In anticipation of the recreations he prepared in his local Tonga and went through one month in Gold Coast, Queensland. Lui was attracted the principal warmth of the starter round on 4 August, completing fourth out of seven competitors, with a period of 11.17 seconds. He completed before Mohan Khan of Bangladesh (11.25 seconds) yet behind Guinea-Bissau's Holder da Silva (10.69 seconds) in a warmth driven by Bruno Rojas from Bolivia (10.62 seconds). Generally speaking Liu set 65th out of 75 sprinters and did not progress into the first round in light of the fact that his time was 0.48 seconds slower than Da' Silva's time who advanced him into the later stages. After the Games he said to "ABC Radio Australia" that while he didn't hope to run rapidly, he communicated his longing to speak to Tonga at the Rio Games. 

ĘťAna Poęťuhila was the most seasoned individual (and the sole female competitor) to partake for Tonga at the London Olympic Games at 32 years old. She had taken an interest in the past two Olympic Games in Athens and Beijing. Po'uhila picked up passage into the Games by gathering capability guidelines since her best toss of 16.40 meters, set at the 2011 Pacific Games, was 0.90 meters superior to the "B" qualifying standard for the ladies' shot put rivalry. She invested energy in Auckland planning for the Games. Amid the passing warmth of her occasion, which occurred on 7 August, the Tongan field competitor was set in the sixteen-man second warmth. Po'uhila was given three endeavors to put the shot the extent that she could. Amid the main endeavor, she heaved the shot 15.80 meters, positioning fourteenth in her warmth. Po'uhila was unfit to best the positioning on her positioning when she heaved it 15.75 meters, putting eleventh among the individuals who tossed amid the second attempt. Her third and last endeavor, 15.11 meters, did not beat her first endeavor. Utilizing her best imprint, 15.80 meters, Po'uhila put 29th out of 30 competitors who finished the occasion. She completed in front of Elena Smolyanova of Uzbekistan (14.42 meters) yet behind Taiwan's Lin Chia-ying (17.43 meters) in a warmth driven by Yevgeniya Kolodko of Russia (19.31 meters). Of the 30 competitors who completed the occasion Po'uhila completed in 29th, and did not advance into the last. 

Contending at his first Olympics, Amini Fonua was the sole agent to contend in Swimming for Tonga's sake. He fit the bill for the recreations by picking up an all inclusiveness place from FINA in light of the fact that his season of one moment and 4.02 seconds did not come to the "An" (Olympic Qualifying Time) or "B" (FINA/Olympic Invititional Time) standard passage times for his occasion, the men's 100 meter breaststroke. Fonua's capability implied Tonga showed up in Olympic swimming challenge. He invested energy preparing in the United States in anticipation of the Olympics. In a meeting before the Games Fonua expressed it was a respect to be his nation's first Olympic swimmer and trusted he would not be the main such contender. He was attracted the challenge's first warmth on 28 July, completing first out of four swimmers, with a period of one moment and 3.65 seconds. Fonua was in front of the closest set finisher Mubarak Al-Besher of the United Arab Emirates (one moment and 5.26 seconds). By and large he put 41st out of 44 contenders and was unfit to progress into the semi-last in the wake of completing 3.07 seconds slower than the slowest competitor who made the following stage.