Moodu Pani 

Moodu Pani () is a 1980 Indian Tamil-language spine chiller movie composed, coordinated and taped by Balu Mahendra and delivered by Raja Cine Arts. Featuring Shoba and Pratap K. Pothen ahead of the pack jobs, with N. Viswanathan, Ganthimathi, Mohan and Bhanu Chander in supporting jobs, it depends on two books: "Idhuvum Oru Viduthalai Thaan" (1978) by Rajendra Kumar, and "The Collector" (1963) by John Fowles. The film recounts to the narrative of Chandru (Pothen), who has a solid scorn towards whores and would execute any such lady whom he experiences. He begins to look all starry eyed at Rekha (Shoba) and thinks wedding her will end his mental pain. 

"Moodu Pani" was the third directorial adventure of Mahendra and his second Tamil movie after "Azhiyatha Kolangal" (1979). It additionally denoted Mohan's presentation in Tamil film. Taping started in January 1980 and finished that April, with shooting occurring generally in Udupi and Ooty. The film's likenesses to Alfred Hitchcock's "Psycho" (1960) and the Oedipal components among Chandru and his mom have been broadly talked about. The soundtrack was created by Ilaiyaraaja, this being his 100th film, and his sibling Gangai Amaran was the principle lyricist. 

"Moodu Pani" was discharged on 6 November 1980 to basic recognition, with specific commendation for the exhibitions of Pothen and Shoba, and Ilaiyaraaja's music, particularly the tune "Yen Iniya Pon Nilavae". The film was a business achievement, running for more than 200 days in theaters. It was additionally in charge of a resurgence of the spine chiller class in Tamil film by then. Regardless of the film moving Pothen to fame, it additionally prompted him being pigeonholed in comparable jobs. 

Chandru, the overseeing chief of a fare organization in Bangalore, has a contempt for whores since adolescence, a result of having watched his mom being beaten by his dad regularly after he went through the night with a whore. Raghunath, a police controller, knows Chandru and his mom. His child Ravi is locked in to Rekha, the little girl of his companion. 

Frequented by recollections of the whore, Chandru baits two whores to desolate places and murders them as he sees that lady in every one of them. Rekha's female companion Pallavi comes to Bangalore to meet her, and phones her for her private location. The discussion is caught by the Madam of a house of ill-repute, who deceives Pallavi. Rather than being taken to Rekha's home, Pallavi is taken to the house of ill-repute and constrained into prostitution. Rekha and Raghunath look for Pallavi. Chandru goes to a similar whorehouse and takes Pallavi in his vehicle, yet murders her. Rekha learns of Pallavi's homicide through Raghunath; neither Rekha nor Raghunath know that Chandru is the killer. 

Still picture taker Bhaskar takes photos of his sweetheart with a motorbike out of sight. Chandru, who had gone ahead that motorbike, had stopped it there and killed a whore who lured him close to a similar area, at that point rode away. Finding out about the homicide in a paper, Bhaskar demonstrates Raghunath the photos with the killer's motorbike out of sight. Raghunath explores and discovers that the proprietor has loaned it to his companion. 

Vexed by his steady displeasure, Chandru meets with a specialist who encourages him to wed soon so he will never again be forlorn, saying the dejection is driving him to harp on his past and enjoy extraordinary acts. Chandru meets Rekha at a theater and afterward at a book slow down. He proposes to Rekha and even begs her to wed him. Shocked at his extraordinary arguing, Rekha cordially discloses to him that she cherishes another person (Ravi), and their marriage is as of now fixed. Raghunath is alarmed when Rekha enlightens him concerning Chandru's proposition to be engaged. 

Chandru continues following Rekha; one day when she goes to visit her companion, he makes her oblivious and removes her to a lodge in Ooty. When she recovers awareness, he discloses to her that he had bought this house in Ooty just for her, and again requests that her wed him. At the point when Rekha cannot and asks to be liberated, he approaches her to remain for somewhere around a month with the goal that she can comprehend him better, and after that lessens it to seven days. He makes every one of the game plans to guarantee that she can't get away. Rekha later pummels Chandru with a spade and flees. He figures out how to get and detain her in the carport of his home, yet is hospitalized for his damage. 

Raghunath visits Chandru's office for an enquiry and discovers that he has gone to Ooty. He likewise meets Chandru's therapist and finds out about his scorn for whores. He promptly associates this with the ongoing updates on the whores killed in the city. Raghunath visits Chandru's home. Covered up in the carport, he finds a similar motorbike captured by Bhaskar. With his doubts developing more grounded, he touches base in Ooty to meet Chandru and visits the police headquarters, where he discovers Chandru's vehicle. The region's reviewer discloses to Raghunath that an obscure individual came in the vehicle to the emergency clinic and was conceded; the vehicle was conveyed to the police headquarters for security. Raghunath visits the emergency clinic, yet finds that Chandru has left. Raghunath is joined by Ravi, and both race to Chandru's home. 

In the mean time, Rekha escapes from the carport and goes into the room where Chandru prior guaranteed his mom remains. Notwithstanding, she finds just a skeleton and is cornered by Chandru, who attempts to ambush her. Ravi and Raghunath hear Rekha shouting and race to the room. Raghunath represses Chandru, who crumples and uncovers that the skeleton is his mother's. Raghunath comprehends Chandru's adoration for his mom and his awful adolescence, which had influenced him to build up a scorn for ladies with free ethics. Chandru is captured, while Rekha and Ravi join together. 

Subsequent to coordinating and composing two unique movies: the Kannada movie "Kokila" (1977) and the Tamil movie "Azhiyatha Kolangal" (1979), Balu Mahendra chose that his third directorial be founded on a distributed novel. The film was "Moodu Pani", an adjustment of "Idhuvum Oru Viduthalai Thaan", a 1978 Tamil tale by Rajendra Kumar, and "The Collector", a 1963 English tale by John Fowles. Mahendra said he put together 40% of the film with respect to "Idhuvum Oru Viduthalai Thaan", and 60% on "The Collector". It was created by Raja Cine Arts, and altered by D.Â Vasu. Notwithstanding composing the screenplay and coordinating the film, Mahendra additionally filled in as the cinematographer. The maker of the film isn't credited, while K. R. Shanmugham is recorded under "Thayarippu Nirvagam" (generation organization). 

Pratap K. Pothen was given a role as Chandru, the easygoing and psychopathic sequential enemy of whores. He had recently worked together with Mahendra on "Azhiyatha Kolangal". Shoba, who had showed up in both "Kokila" and "Azhiyatha Kolangal", was picked to play the female lead, with Mahendra guaranteeing the film was "uniquely made" for her. It was her last coordinated effort with Mahendra before her demise. 

N. Viswanathan was given a role as the police overseer Raghunath, and Bhanu Chander was picked to play Raghunath's child and Rekha's fiancăš Ravi (in spite of the fact that he was not credited), while Ganthimathi was given a role as the Madam of a whorehouse. Vijaychandrika showed up as a whore killed by Chandru. Mohan, who later turned into a main performer in Tamil film, made his introduction in Tamil with this film, playing the still picture taker Bhaskar. It was his second movie under Mahendra's bearing, after "Kokila". 

Key photography for "Moodu Pani" started in January 1980 and finished in late April, a couple of days before Shoba's suicide on 1 May. The film was shot basically in Udupi and Ooty. Mahendra shot the film in sloping spots "to catch that cloudy feel". In making "Moodu Pani", Mahendra confronted the test of recognizing it from P. Bharathiraja's "Sigappu Rojakkal" (1978), which had a comparable subject. The last length of the film was . 

In spite of the fact that "Moodu Pani" is authoritatively founded on "Idhuvum Oru Viduthalai Thaan", Mahendra recognized to likewise having been roused by Alfred Hitchcock's spine chiller "Psycho" (1960). As per Rukmini Krishnan of "Day by day News and Analysis", it was "Psycho" that motivated Mahendra to make "Moodu Pani". R. Ilangovan of "Bleeding edge" expressed that while Mahendra was enlivened by "Psycho", his camera work, the "fog secured evenings" of Bangalore and Ooty, and the "strangeness" of the subject made the film "one of a kind". While "Idhuvum Oru Viduthalai Thaan" and its creator were recognized in the opening credits of the film, Hitchcock and "Psycho" were most certainly not. As indicated by Sify, there is a solid comparability between "Moodu Pani" and "Psycho" as the male leads in the two movies keep the skeletal survives from their particular moms, which they keep on speaking with. Mahendra's devotee Ameer noticed the Oedipal components among Chandru and his perished mother. 

Mahendra, in his now dead blog "Moondram Pirai...", alluded to the film as an anticipation spine chiller, while N. Venkateswaran of "The Times of India" depicted it as a thrill ride. Devika Bai, composing for the "New Straits Times", alluded to "Moodu Pani" as a whodunit film. The 2017 book "Indian Horror Cinema" by Mithuraaj Dhusiya compared it to a slasher film in light of the various whores killed by Chandru. K.Â Hariharan, executive of the L. V. Prasad Film and TV Academy, noticed that sexuality and the constraint of want were the overwhelming themes in "Moodu Pani", communicated through the baffling hazy climates of Ooty where the hero goes up against their mental adversary. He additionally noticed that "Moodu Pani", in the same way as other of Mahendra's movies, acquired its topics and complex gadgets from French New Wave and New Hollywood styles of filmmaking. Ilangovan noticed that Chandru's character, which was delineated as having flashes of evil verging on corruption, was new to Tamil film. Wrongdoing and investigator fiction author Pattukkottai Prabakar considers "Moodu Pani", alongside "Sigappu Rojakkal" and "Nooravathu Naal" (1984), to investigate the identities and conduct qualities of insane people in detail. 

The film's soundtrack and score were formed by Ilaiyaraaja, this being his 100th film. It was likewise the principal movie in which he worked together with Mahendra; Ilaiyaraaja would later make for hard and fast of Mahendra's movies until "Thalaimuraigal" (2013), the chief's last film before his demise in February 2014. Mahendra reviewed in 2007, "When I initially met [Ilaiyaraaja] I clarified him what my sort of motion picture is and what I anticipate from him. The foundation score should permit significant hushes in my movies. I trust quiet passes on more than words or music". 

"Moodu Pani" denoted A. R. Rahman's first relationship with Ilaiyaraaja. Rahman (at that point known by his original name Dilip) who was only 13 years of age at that point, functioned as a console developer in the film. Amid the foundation scoring sessions of "Moodu Pani", Ilaiyaraaja terminated his old console software engineer, because of the individual's drinking conduct. Around then, another of his troupe individuals asked Ilaiyaraaja to meet a kid named Dilip, who was at that point doing console programming for Malayalam films. Ilaiyaraaja concurred and sent for Dilip, whom he educated with respect to the notes and tune he needed to play. Dilip, under Ilaiyaraaja's watch, effectively finished the foundation score. 

The soundtrack was discharged under the name EMI Records. "Yen Iniya Pon Nilavae" was written in January 1980, and is set in the carnatic raga known as Natabhairavi. As indicated by Ilaiyaraaja's sibling Gangai Amaran, it was one of the hardest tunes in the collection to compose. Mahendra needed a tune delineating Chandru playing the guitar and approached Ilaiyaraaja for a tune; Ilaiyaraaja played the "scratch notes" of "Ilaya Nila", yet Mahendra was not satisfied and requested another tune; Ilaiyaraaja gave him the tune of "Yen Iniya Pon Nilavae", and this was held. "Ilaya Nila" was therefore utilized in "Payanangal Mudivathillai" (1982). Similarly as with "Yen Iniya Pon Nilavae", the melody "Paruva Kaalangalin" is additionally set in Natabhairavi. As indicated by A. S. Panneerselvan of "Cutting edge", the overwhelming kind of the music utilized in "Moodu Pani" was "present day jazz with a sprinkling of vanguard components." Gangai Amaran was the primary lyricist of the soundtrack, aside from the English-language number "Sing Swing" (otherwise called "Swing") which was composed by Viji Manuel (credited as Vijaysamuel on the principal soundtrack version, and Vijaymanuel on the second); the lyricist of "Aasai Raja", isn't credited. The primary soundtrack release did not highlight "Aasai Raja"; the tune was, in any case, incorporated into a 1981 version of the soundtrack. 

Composing for "The Times of India", Deepauk Murugesan lauded "Yen Iniya Pon Nilavae" for appearing. J. Yesudas' flexibility as an artist. In July 2011, D.Â Karthikeyan of "The Hindu" recorded the film's experience score close by the arranger's different movies, for example, "Mullum Malarum" (1978), "Uthiripookkal" (1979), "Moondram Pirai" (1982), "Nayakan" (1987) and "Thalapathi" (1991). Indo-Asian News Service portrayed "Yen Iniya Pon Nilavae" as a standout amongst Yesudas' "best tunes". Jaya Madhavan composed for "The New Indian Express", "Who can overlook [Yesudas'] melodies "En iniya pon nilave", "raja chozhan", "Kanchi pattuduthi" to give some examples? Gracious! I cherish his film music." It was additionally incorporated into "Dinamalar" 2016 rundown ordering the "Best 300 tunes" created by Ilaiyaraaja. 

Components of "Yen Iniya Pon Nilavae" were fused by Ilaiyaraaja in his tune "Baatein Hawa" from "Cheeni Kum" (2007). A remix rendition of "Yen Iniya Pon Nilavae" is included on music craftsman M.Â Rafi's collection "Aasaiyae Alaipolae". In 2006, Yesudas performed "Yen Iniya Pon Nilavae" amid a program held at PSG College of Technology, sorted out by Helpline Arts Academy to support the training of underprivileged youngsters in and around Coimbatore. In March 2010, vocalist Vijay Prakash performed "Yen Iniya Pon Nilavae" as a major aspect of a variety, at the Star Vijay music show "Kaadhal Unplugged". Artist Srinivas played out the melody live the next year in a show composed by Rotary Coimbatore Central, as did Ajesh, at the Puthuyugam TV music show "Yugam Unplugged" in March 2014, trailed by Yesudas' child Vijay in a 2015 show titled "Yesudas 50". 

"Moodu Pani" was discharged on 6 November 1980. The film was industrially effective, running for more than 200 days in theaters. It got basic approval, with pundits applauding the exhibitions of Pothen and Shoba. On 30 November 1980, "Ananda Vikatan" said that a large portion of the discoursed in the film were spoken by the camera, and felt that when there was incredible cinematography, there was no requirement for screenplay and exchanges. The 1991 book "Indian Cinema" by India's Ministry of Information and Broadcasting states that Mahendra and Pothen "had conveyed great craftsmanship to their delicately recounted stories, for example, "Moodu Pani". English writer Phil Hardy expressed in his 1997 book "The BFI Companion to Crime", "At last, given the inclination in Indian film to change effective Hollywood movies, it merits flagging Balu Mahendra's redo of "Psycho" in Tamil, "Moodupani" (1980)." 

Bhama Devi Ravi of "The Times of India" said in 2008, "With his nice habits, Pothan was splendid as a sequential executioner, and the most recent couple of minutes of the film were rivetting." In February 2014, S.Â Saraswathi of Rediff.com included "Moodu Pani" in her rundown, "The Best Films of Balu Mahendra". K.Â S. Sivakumaran of "Ceylon Today" portrayed the film as "somewhere between masterful and simply engaging." S. R. Ashok Kumar of "The Hindu" portrayed "Moodu Pani" as one of "the [Tamil] business' best movies". "The Telegraph" called it one of Mahendra's "artful culminations", as did U. Tejonmayam, composing for "The New Indian Express". 

After "Sigappu Rojakkal", there was a resurgence of the spine chiller class in Tamil film, as confirm by movies like "Moodu Pani". As indicated by film maker and essayist G. Dhananjayan, the film "roused an age to take up film-production". M. Suganth of "The Times of India" expressed that Mahendra "changed the scene of Tamil film with his unmistakable visuals and varied movies, for example, "Moodu Pani". Pothen reviewed in January 2015 that it was the concurrent arrival of "Moodu Pani" and his other film "Varumayin Niram Sivappu" that made him a star. Be that as it may, both "Varumayin Niram Sivappu", which portrayed Pothen as an erratic chief fixated on an on-screen character, and "Moodu Pani" prompted him being pigeonholed in comparable jobs. "The two jobs got the open creative ability, and I concede I traded out when I was offered comparative stuff. Presently, except if I'm offered a nonsensical measure of cash, I question I'll acknowledge these jobs," he said in a 2014 meeting. 

In "Iruvar Mattum" (2006), Azhagu (Abhay) keeps the skeletal survives from his mom and often converses with her; Sify contrasted this plot detail with that of "Moodu Pani" and "Psycho". Malathi Rangarajan of "The Hindu", in her survey of "Julie Ganapathi" (2003) a film about a rationally unhinged lady (Saritha) who spares a mishap injured individual (Jayaram) from death, medical caretakers him in her very own home and furthermore begins to look all starry eyed at him, however holds him hostage there, expressed that the film had "shades" of "Moodu Pani". Performing artist Veera Bahu expressed that he viewed "Moodu Pani" in anticipation of his job as a maniac in the spine chiller "Nadunisi Naaygal". Checking on "Amara Kaaviyam" (2014), Sify adulated its cinematographer Jeeva Shankar for "displaying Ooty in trademark [Balu Mahendra's] way" in the style of "Moodu Pani". 

In "Vaaranam Aayiram" (2008), when Suriya's character first observes Sameera Reddy's character and begins to look all starry eyed at her, he takes his guitar and performs "Yen Iniya Pon Nilavae". Pothen communicated gratefulness for Suriya's form of the melody in a May 2015 meeting, saying that he had "delighted in it". In June 2014 amid Ilaiyaraaja's 71st birthday, vocalists Shweta Mohan and Aalap Raju worked together to make a video in which they played out a portion of Ilaiyaraaja's melodies as a tribute to him; one tune was "Yen Iniya Pon Nilavae". In May 2015, the FM radio station, Radio City, honored Ilaiyaraaja's 72nd birthday by communicating the arranger's melodies in an uncommon show titled "Raja Rajathan" for 91 days. "Yen Iniya Pon Nilavae" was a standout amongst the most mentioned tunes on the show. Albeit no print of "Moodu Pani" is known to endure, the film is as yet accessible on home video.