I Can See the Whole Room...and There's Nobody in It! 

I Can See the Whole Room...and There's Nobody in It! (once in a while I Can See the Whole Room and There's Nobody in It! or on the other hand basically I Can See the Whole Room!) is a 1961 painting by Roy Lichtenstein. It is an artistic creation of a man glancing through a peephole. It once in the past held the record for most elevated closeout cost for a Lichtenstein painting. 

The work depends on a William Overgard-drawn funnies board from a "Steve Roper" animation. Lichtenstein's deduction increases the introduction of the account and extends the utilization of shading in the picture. Likewise with the first the picture utilizes the topic of vision, and spotlights explicitly on motorized vision just as monocularity. 

In view of a 1961 William Overgard drawing for a "Steve Roper" animation story distributed by the Publishers Syndicate on August 6, 1961, Lichtenstein’s "I Can See the Whole Room!...and There's Nobody in It!" (1961) measures four-foot by four-foot and is in graphite and oil. The work of art delineates a man glancing through a gap in an entryway. His finger is reached out to open a round peephole, while at the same time enabling the craftsman to show his face. The canvas additionally utilizes a discourse swell. 

It was sold by gatherer Courtney Sale Ross for $43.2 million, twofold its gauge, at Christie's in New York City in November 2011; the vender's significant other, Steve Ross had gained it at closeout in 1988 for $2.1 million. The depiction initially sold for $550 in 1961. It outperformed the $42.6 million record set the past November by "Ohhh...Alright..." The next May, it was outperformed by "Dozing Girl", which sold for $44.8 million. 

The image prods the watcher who is given the inclination that they are in a dim room being seen by the fundamental subject of the work of art who is a man that looks through an opening in the entryway. The account component of the picture, which incorporated a discourse bubble that shows the subtitle "I Can See the Whole Room and There's Nobody in It", illuminates that the man can not see anything in the room despite the fact that he has a decent take a gander at it. The work is a mocking reference to reflection since it very well may be envisioned as a monochrome canvas that is influenced by a performer that has embedded his finger just as a story that additionally damages this envisioning. This finger is additionally viewed as phallic. 

The discourse bubble makes the whole canvas significant by expanding the consideration regarding the whole width of the sketch and the bends of the air pocket join the account with a few of the image's other graphical components. Lichtenstein has included shading, including the majority of the essential hues, while changing the first and making reference to mechanical generation by means of Ben-Day specks. Like "Look Mickey", there is motivation to portray this picture as a self-representation of sorts. The subject is broadening a finger through a roundabout opening, which is a self-reference since it is illustrative of Lichtenstein's strategy of stenciling Ben-day dabs by squeezing the liquid onto the canvas surface through a screen with a gadget not very extraordinary fit as a fiddle from a finger. An elective self-portrayal is deciphered as a solitary peephole that speaks to the monocular topic of Lichtenstein's preparation, while the whole canvas speaks to an uncertainty in this current preparing's portrayal of the physical body, its recognition and its genuine view. In any case, the bodily is portrayed sufficiently in the exceptional phallicism and the specked hue of the skin. 

The work is a case of Lichtenstein's introduction of the vulnerability of the one-peered toward viewpoint. It is viewed as a work regarding the matter of "central vision and visual impairment", and it is an unmistakable case of the subject going through Lichtenstein's specialty identifying with vision. He utilizes the account to underscore this subject, while playing on both the roundabout peephole and the round eyes. The portrayed mechanical gadget, a peephole for this situation, powers the vision into a monocular group. Monocularity is channeled through the crude peephole mechanical assembly that nearly imitates a camera focal point. In certain faculties, monocularity of this work is a solid topic that is legitimately epitomized albeit just by reference. Likewise, the work is viewed as firmly identified with his later work, "Picture Duplicator" (1963), which is viewed as a redress of "I Can See the Whole Room!" with its glaring and forceful binocularity. The monocularity of "I Can See the Whole Room!" ought to be seen as a concentrated type of monocularity, for example, "the normal experience of shutting one eye so as to fix an item in the look", however a subjected type of monocularity that is upgraded by innovation.