Two Birds (Awake) 

"Two Birds" is the twelfth scene of the American TV police procedural dream dramatization "Wakeful". The scene debuted on NBC on May 17, 2012. In the scene, Michael gets familiar with reality of the mishap. He attempts to get proof that Ed Hawkins (Kevin Weisman) endeavored to execute him, and discovers that Hawkins' boss Carl Kessel (Mark Harelik) was likewise in on this setup. 

The story and idea of the scene was composed by Evan Katz, with teleplay by Howard Gordon and Davey Holmes. It was coordinated by Milan Cheylov. "Two Birds" was generally welcomed by pundits, who adulated its storylines. Observers noticed that the content was elegantly composed. After airing, "Two Birds" acquired 2.1 million watchers in the United States and a 0.7 rating in the 18–49 statistic, as indicated by Nielsen appraisals. 

The scene begins with Michael Britten (Jason Isaacs) endeavoring to persuade specialists Dr. Jonathan Lee (BD Wong) and Dr. Judith Evans (Cherry Jones) that Ed Hawkins (Kevin Weisman) attempted to execute him. The specialists guarantee that he is envisioning the plot to adapt. 

Afterward, Michael reveals to Rex he should remain with his Aunt Carol, as Michael is taking a shot at a case with a risky suspect. His accomplice, Bird, goes to his home, in the wake of endeavoring to call him to ensure he is okay, however then looks in the carport and discovers Michael's work on his mishap and Detective Hawkins. Flying creature goes to Dr. Judith Evans, who reluctantly encourages Bird to mind Michael. Michael goes to Ed Hawkins' home, shoots Hawkins in the leg, and approaches him for proof. Hawkins says heroin was taken from different proof storage spaces and conveyed available to be purchased through Westfield Distribution, and additional proof is on his PC. Hawkins attempts to overwhelm Michael, driving him to murder Hawkins, directly before Bird goes into the house. Michael takes Bird's firearm and binds him. Flying creature proposes that to get into Hawkins' PC, they utilize a programmer the two of them worked with already, directly before he thumps out Michael, who awakens in the red reality. 

Michael advises his significant other to remain some place safe, and after that advises the red reality Bird to meet him in the recreation center. He discloses to Bird what he discovered in the green reality (where his child is alive and his significant other is dead) with respect to Hawkins, his mishap and the encoded document and persuades Bird to duplicate it from Hawkins' PC, however neither of them realize Hawkins has been watching them. Hawkins meets quickly with Tricia Harper and Carl Kessel (uncovered to be Bird and Hawkins' region boss in this reality) and Kessel says they will slaughter both Michael and Bird and make it look like Michael did it, given his as of late shaky conduct. Chief Harper demonstrates questions and regret at this thought, yet concurs. 

Still in the red reality (where his child is dead and his better half is alive), Michael visits the programmer proposed in the green reality. He picks up Hawkins' secret phrase and opens the document. The documents disclose to Michael that Hawkins and Kessel had a delivery holder where they had been putting away the heroin. Fowl discloses to Michael that they will meet at his home, however when Michael arrives, Hawkins has slaughtered Bird and endeavors to execute Michael. Hawkins, be that as it may, just figures out how to harm him. Hawkins brings in that Michael murdered Bird and Captain Harper discloses to her region to utilize dangerous power to acquire Michael, a lot to Detective Vega's astonishment. Vega endeavors to reveal to Harper that, even disturbed, Michael could never execute Bird, however Harper sincerely disproves him, saying he is appearing for an executioner. This leaves Vega confounded and suspicious. Michael figures out how to escape Hawkins, yet goes out from his injury and awakens back in the green reality. 

He winds up back in his vehicle, bound, however mitigated to see that the green reality Bird is as yet alive. He gives Bird Hawkins' secret phrase ("tulip"), and the data with respect to Kessel and the delivery holder persuades Bird that something isn't right. He takes Michael to Harper still in handcuffs yet the two of them disclose to her what they have realized. Harper favors Bird's arrangement to send a group to the capacity holder yet sends Michael to a cell, saying that on the off chance that they don't discover any proof of his allegations, he'll go to imprison for executing Hawkins. 

The story and idea of the scene was composed by counseling maker Evan Katz, with teleplay by official maker Howard Gordon and co-official maker Davey Holmes; it was Katz's third composition credit, Gordon's fourth composition credit, and Holmes' second composition credit. It was coordinated by Milan Cheylov, his initially coordinating credit for the arrangement. 

In January 2012, it was reported that Kevin Weisman would show up in various scenes of "Conscious". This is Weisman's second appearance on the arrangement as Ed Hawkins. Other visitor stars included Laura Innes as Tricia Harper and Daniela Bobadilla as Emma. 

"Two Birds" was initially communicated on in the United States on NBC between 10:00 p.m. what's more, 11:00 p.m., and got 2.1 million watchers in the United States, marginally down from the past scene. It procured a 0.7 rating in the 18–49 statistic, as indicated by Nielsen appraisals, implying that it was seen by 0.9% of every one of the 18-to 49-year-olds. 

The scene was met with recognition from generally pundits. "IGN" evaluated it 9 of 10 as "astonishing", and composed that "it truly increase the power". Alan Sepinwall from "HitFix" complimented portions of the scene, strikingly the "fantastic work from Jason Isaacs, Steve Harris and Laura Innes in the two substances", regardless of guaranteeing that they didn't especially think about the content. "Television Fanatic" appraised it 4.6 out of 5, and noticed that "Wakeful works so much better when there’s one bringing together case". "Screenrant" commended the scene, guaranteeing that there was "some fabulous altering and composing that enables two discussions between three individuals to show up as one durable trade, essentially setting up the rest of the scene". "ScreenCrush" asserted that "an intrigue that saw NBC running this incredible hotshot the street, or a straightforward sad mishap.". "The Voice of TV" evaluated the scene an "A-", regardless of asserting that it is irritating that he doesn't inform his relatives concerning his new information. The TV.com official blog asserted the scene was "difficult to support". "The A.V. Club" evaluated the scene "B+", guaranteeing that it was "totally engaging and immersing", and that "it's only a slight tick down from a week ago's "Make proper acquaintance with My Little Friend", which was the best scene since "Wakeful" pilot, and the most dreamlike since the visualizations of "That is Not My Penguin."