Merv Harvey 

Mervyn Roye Harvey (29 April 1918 – 18 March 1995) was a cricketer who played in one Test coordinate for Australia in 1947. His more youthful sibling, Neil, was one of Australia's best batsmen, and the pair played together for Victoria amid the last piece of Merv's vocation. 

Merv Harvey broke into the Victorian state group amid the 1940–41 season and played in three top of the line matches. The feature of the main period of his profession for Victoria was a fast 70 out of one hour against a New South Wales assault containing Bill O'Reilly, viewed as the best bowler on the planet at the time. Be that as it may, the flare-up of World War II in the Pacific caused the suspension of top-level cricket and ended Harvey's advancement. Harvey at that point served in the Royal Australian Air Force as an airframe fitter, losing his best cricketing a very long time to the war. 

An opening batsman, Harvey was portrayed by Neil as "the best cricketer of all of us" and known for his assaulting style and propensity for snaring quick bowlers. He was at first disregarded for Victorian choice after cricket continued in 1945–46, before being reviewed for the last match of the period, and he reacted by scoring a vocation best 163. He was an ordinary individual from the Victorian group amid the 1946–47 season, and in spite of the fact that he confronted much challenge for national choice as Australia had a wealth of value openers at the time, he was chosen for his solitary Test amid the fourth Test of the period against England at the Adelaide Oval when both Bill Brown and Sid Barnes were harmed. Harvey made 12 and 31 preceding being dropped promptly because of Barnes' recuperation. 

In 1947–48, Harvey played with more youthful siblings Neil and Ray in two counterparts for Victoria, captaining the group in the second of these installations. Be that as it may, his very own structure started to disappear and he was dropped from the group halfway through the season. In 1948–49, Harvey stayed outside the primary decision group, and played in just two top of the line matches against Tasmania when Victoria handled a second-string group. He resigned toward the finish of the period, having played just 22 top of the line coordinates in an intruded on vocation. Harvey captained his state multiple times amid the post-war period of his vocation, remaining in when ordinary skipper Lindsay Hassett was away on national obligation. 

Merv Harvey was conceived in Broken Hill, New South Wales to Horace "Horrie" and Elsie Harvey. Horace worked for BHP driving steed drawn trailers. Merv was the second tyke in the family and the most established child. Five more youthful siblings were to pursue, in sequential request Mick, Harold, Ray, Neil and Brian. The family migrated to Newcastle, a mining town and harbor in New South Wales, before moving to the inward Melbourne suburb of Fitzroy, a staunchly common laborers, modern zone. Horace verified a vocation at the ice cream parlor organization Life Savers (Australasia) Ltd, situated nearby to their home at 198 Argyle Street. The nineteenth century two-story house was claimed by the firm and was utilized as lodgings for the workers’ families. It never again exists, having been crushed to clear path for a material plant. 

The Cornish-plunged Horace raised his family as severe Methodists, forbidding betting, liquor, tobacco and obscenity in his family. A fervent cricketer amid his years in New South Wales, he was sufficient to hit 196 keeps running amid a match in Newcastle, and he urged his kids to play sport. He himself played for the Rita Social Club in the wake of moving to Fitzroy. 

As recreational offices and grass ovals were inadequate in thickly populated Fitzroy, Merv and his more youthful siblings played cricket in a cobblestone laneway between their terraced house. Here they played cricket with a tennis ball, home made cricket bat and a lamp oil tin for a wicket. They were generally joined by other nearby kids, two of whom wound up world class sportsmen: Allan Ruthven and Harold Shillinglaw. The gathering additionally played Australian guidelines football, kicking around moved up cardboard and paper. A significant part of the batting aptitude shown by the Harvey siblings has been ascribed to these diversions played on the erratic ricochet of the rough laneway. The surface additionally had a V-molded slant inwards towards the focal point of the path, making balls stray sideways subsequent to skipping. As the laneway implied that the playing territory was long and restricted, the young men additionally needed to figure out how to play the ball straight as per conventional cricket procedure. The Harveys played another type of cricket in their cemented patio utilizing a marble rather than a ball, and a scaled down bat. This honed their reflexes. 

Merv was the first of the siblings to go to the adjacent George Street State School and join the Fitzroy Cricket Club as they achieved their initial adolescents. The club had a program whereby they gave a decoration for each neighborhood school to grant to the best cricketer in their positions in that year. The fruitful understudy would then be offered access to the majority of the club's offices. The majority of the Harvey siblings were beneficiaries were of this award. At Fitzroy, they went under the impact of previous Victorian all-rounder Arthur Liddicut and the club's veteran chief Joe Plant. Merv and his more youthful kin had no formal instructing, and their dad, a customary nearness at the club, remained out of sight as their individual vocations created. Horace did not exhort his children on the most proficient method to bat, enabling them to figure their very own style and system. As indicated by the siblings, it was their mom who was vocal and outgoing, as opposed to their held dad. The young men who neglected to score runs were given kitchen obligation, and as indicated by them, their folks never demonstrated bias. 

Amid the winter, they played baseball for Fitzroy Baseball Club, regularly contending in matches played as drape raisers to the world class Australian guidelines football rivalry, the Victorian Football League. Saturday night excitement for the family regularly comprised of supper after the day's cricket matches for Fitzroy, and Plant, Liddicut and other cricket club staff were frequently welcomed. Affected by Plant and Liddicut, the young men were educated to receive a forceful methodology, utilizing quick feet development to assault turn bowling specifically. In 1932, Harvey captained the Victorian Under-15 students group on a voyage through Queensland and one of his players was future Victorian and Australian partner Keith Miller. Harvey graduated to Fitzroy's first XI in 1933–34. 

Amid the 1938–39 season, Harvey was chosen for the Victorian Second XI to play in a match against their partners from New South Wales. Harvey was run out for four in the principal innings and afterward made eight as his group surrendered to a 227-run rout. Subsequently, he was not called up into the First XI for the following two years. 

Harvey made his top notch debut for Victoria against Queensland at the Gabba in 1940–41. In the primary innings, he made 25 preceding being gotten by wicket-manager Don Tallon from the bowling of Jack Ellis as the guests took first innings focuses in a drawn match. In the following match, he established a connection. Subsequent to making 35 in the principal innings, he scored 70 out of an hour's batting in the second innings at the SCG against New South Wales. In the two innings, he was rejected by leg spinner Bill O'Reilly, the main bowler on the planet, however Victoria figured out how to win by 24 runs. The groups met again three weeks after the fact, and this time, New South Wales turned the table, winning by 235 runs. Harvey made 14 in the primary innings, bowled by O'Reilly for the second innings in succession. In the second innings he made 38 preceding being evacuated by another leg spinner, Cec Pepper. Harvey finished the season with 182 keeps running at 36.40. 

Harvey enrolled in the Royal Australian Air Force (RAAF) at Fitzroy on 12 May 1942 and was an individual from the 30 Squadron. He filled in as an airframe fitter amid World War II, which seriously intruded on his donning vocation, and top notch cricket was dropped after the Japanese besieging of Pearl Harbor incited the flare-up of threats in the Pacific. He was released on 25 January 1946 with the position of aircraftman. As indicated by cricket overseer Bill Jacobs, the war cost Harvey his prime cricketing years. Jacobs trusted that Harvey would have been chosen for Australia in the period generally hindered by war. 

After the war finished in 1945, top of the line cricket continued in 1945–46. Harvey played in a preliminary counterpart for state determination. Playing for the Rest of Victoria against the principal decision state group, he made 82 and 25. This was insufficient to persuade the state selectors and Harvey did not get a review to the Victorian group until the finish of the period when he played against South Australia at the Adelaide Oval. He reacted by striking a profession best 163 to push his group to an innings win. 

Following the war, Harvey confronted a great deal of rivalry for a spot as an opening batsman in the Australian group, yet an opportunity emerged in 1946–47, when Bill Brown, who had captained Australia the past season and opened for the nation in Tests during the 1930s, was sidelined with damage for the entire summer. 

In the principal match of the period, Harvey's Victorians confronted the visiting England cricket group driven by Wally Hammond. In the principal innings, Harvey made 21 of the group's 189 preceding being gotten and bowled by leg spinner Doug Wright. He at that point made 57 preceding being expelled by Alec Bedser as the hosts fell for just 204 in quest for 449 for triumph, losing by 244 runs. 

This was sufficient for him to be chosen in the Australian XI for a match against the Englishmen, in what was successfully a Test dress practice. Downpour shortened the match, and the diversion did not achieve the second innings; Harvey made 22 in his solitary chance. 

There was another counterpart for Victoria against South Australia before the Tests, permitting him another opportunity to push his case for national choice. It was additionally his first Sheffield Shield coordinate; his past appearances for Victoria in interstate recreations were in seasons where the challenge was canceled because of war and supplanted by coincidental matches. Harvey could oversee just 9 as Victoria amassed 548 in their first innings. They required 79 keeps running for triumph in 35 minutes on the last evening, and with brisk scoring required, the more forceful Keith Miller opened instead of Harvey. At the point when the principal wicket fell with the objective nearly finished, Harvey came in and made three not out when the match was finished. These exhibitions were insufficient for the Australian selectors and Harvey was disregarded for the group for the initial two Tests. 

After this, Harvey had two chances to press for choice for the following Test. He made 13 out of an innings triumph over Queensland and kept on being neglected. The second match was the Shield conflict with most outstanding adversaries New South Wales, which began on Boxing Day at the MCG. After the guests had made 205, Harvey opened with Ken Meuleman, who was out at 1/31, conveying Miller to the wrinkle. Mill operator pounded the bowling and Victoria were 1/154 by the day's end. The following day, the 271-pursue organization finished a little more than three hours when Miller fell at 2/302. Harvey proceeded to make 136 in what was for the most part viewed as his best innings. He broadly snared driving Australian paceman Ray Lindwall, the quickest on the planet at the time, over the fence into the open bar for six. It was one of only a handful couple of events that Lindwall was hit for six in his long vocation. Victoria pronounced at 8/560, Test bowlers Lindwall and Ernie Toshack taking the most discipline with figures of 1/100 and 0/133 from 18 and 21 overs separately, as Victoria proceeded to win by an innings and 114 runs. 

In the arrival coordinate against Queensland, Harvey made 17 as Victoria took a persuading innings win. In the following match against New South Wales, Harvey played with Neil out of the blue at top of the line level, and pair played together for their state's two outstanding matches of the period, in spite of the fact that they never batted together as Merv was constantly out before Neil came in, more often than not at No. 6. Merv made 30 and 44, neglecting to profit by his begins to make a major score with a Test opportunity calling; occupant opener Sid Barnes was harmed and inaccessible for the Fourth Test. 

By and by, Harvey was chosen to play his solitary Test, the Fourth Test at Adelaide, filling in for the harmed Barnes. Britain batted first and made 460 preceding being expelled late on the second day. Harvey opened with Arthur Morris, and made 12 in the main innings before being bowled by Bedser while playing a forceful shot. With just a couple of minutes of play left, the Australian chief Don Bradman came in and he also was bowled by Bedser, without scoring a run. Harvey later secretly said the Bradman had guided him to play mindfully and make due until the day's end, as opposed to assault, and that the skipper was furious with the subsequent two wickets. As indicated by Harvey, Bradman disclosed to him that he could never be chosen for Australia again. The visitors at that point pronounced amid the last evening and left Australia an objective of 314. The objective was not a reasonable offer and Morris and Harvey put on an opening stand of 116 preceding the last was bowled for 31 by the medium pace of intermittent bowler Norman Yardley. The match finished in a draw with Australia on 1/215. 

Barnes recouped and continued his situation for the Fifth Test. Harvey finished his season by scoring 10 in his solitary innings of Victoria's second visit coordinate against England, which was drawn, and was 3 not out in the principal innings of the Shield coordinate against South Australia when it was washed out. Harvey made his captaincy debut in the last match as Lindsay Hassett was speaking to Australia in the Fifth Test, and his bowlers rejected South Australia for 222 in Victoria's solitary innings in the field. This washed-out drawn match was the main time in six Shield matches amid the season that Victoria did not rise triumphant, and they won the challenge. Harvey finished the season with 405 keeps running at 33.75. 

By 1947–48, Brown had recouped, so Harvey needed to contend with him just as Morris and Barnes for choice. In the primary match of the period against the visiting Indians, Harvey made 4 and 35. The next week, he made 89 in the primary innings against South Australia however overseen just three in the second innings as the Victorians fallen to be full scale for 182 and lost by nine wickets. Harvey was neglected for the Australian XI for the Test preliminary against India the next week. Rather, he played in the match against Queensland, scoring just 13 and 3. He was in this manner ignored for the Test choice. Amid this time, he played close by Neil in everything except the Queensland coordinate, when his more youthful sibling was playing in the Australian XI. Be that as it may, neither batted together. 

Neil came back to the Victorian group for the match against New South Wales at the SCG the next week, and Ray was chosen to make his top of the line debut, so three Harveys were in the state group out of the blue. Merv opened, while Neil and Ray batted at Nos. 4 and 7 separately. Victoria batted first and the siblings again did not shape any organizations. Merv opened and made 45 as Victoria finished with 331; the Harvey siblings had scored practically a large portion of the runs. New South Wales were compelled to pursue on, and Victoria were set 51 for triumph. After the fall of Fred Freer at 1/24, commander Lindsay Hassett raised Ray to No. 3, permitting two Harveys to bat together out of the blue at top notch level. Beam and Merv put on an unbeaten association of 27 to take Victoria to a nine-wicket win. Merv and Ray finished unbeaten on 12 and 22 separately. 

The trio at that point continued to play together in the following match against Western Australia two weeks after the fact and Merv captained the group as Hassett was away on Test obligation. Victoria batted first and Neil came in to join Merv with the score at 2/102, and the pair included 173 together before the more youthful sibling succumbed to 94. One run later, Merv was out for 141 in what ended up being his last five star century; later, Ray made just 1. Victoria finished on 370 and Western Australia took a 59-run lead. In the second innings, Merv made 6 and did not bat with his siblings. He proclaimed the innings at 9/304, setting Western Australia an objective of 246 for triumph. They achieved 5/205 and Victoria stayed away from thrashing. A fortnight later, Harvey again captained the group and made a duck in his solitary innings in a downpour diminished match. After the Victorians had made 412, Queensland achieved 5/144 toward the finish of the match. Regardless of being the skipper, Harvey was dropped for the following match and was ignored for the remainder of the period, finishing with 351 keeps running at 35.10. 

In the wake of being dropped for the second 50% of the past season, Harvey had even less open doors in 1948–49. His solitary counterparts for Victoria came amid the Christmas time frame, when he played back to back installations, both against Tasmania. In spite of the fact that the two diversions had top notch status, they were adequately Second XI apparatuses, as the primary decision group was playing Sheffield Shield coordinates in the meantime. Victoria just batted once in every inning and Harvey made 7 and 36 separately. Harvey captained the group, and they commanded the two matches. The Victorians took a first-innings lead of 171 in the principal coordinate, yet downpour intrusions finished the match with Tasmania at 1/100 in their second innings, still 71 keeps running falling behind financially. In the second match, Victoria expelled their rivals for 65 in the primary innings to take a lead of 309 runs and they proceeded to win by an innings and 73 runs. Having seen his past four matches as chief end in a draw, Harvey finished his top of the line profession with his solitary triumph as a pioneer in his last match. 

Harvey kept playing in the First XI for Fitzroy until 1954–55, and he completed with 6,654 keeps running at 29.31 in 207 First XI matches for the club. Harvey was an assaulting opening batsman, solid on the drive and partial to snaring quick bowling. His sibling Neil called him "the best cricketer of all of us". 

Harvey worked for over five decades for a similar designing firm, and lived with his better half Myrtle in the western modern suburb of Footscray. He had two children, Jeff and Graeme, both of whom played in first grade for Fitzroy. His grandson Robert Harvey—son of Jeff—was one of the main Australian guidelines footballers of the 1990s and the mid 21st century. Robert made his Australian Football League debut for St Kilda Football Club in 1988 and played 21 seasons. He was an individual from the All-Australian group multiple times and won the Brownlow Medal twice, in 1997 and 1998, generally advantageous and most attractive player. Robert played for Victoria at Under-19 level as a bowler, yet he was at that point playing top-flight football at the time and surrendered his cricket vocation after the national Under-19 competition. Another grandson Anthony, the more youthful sibling of Robert, additionally played for St Kilda and captained Norwood to the 1997 South Australian National Football League (SANFL) prevalence.