Paparazzi (Girls' Generation melody) 

"Paparazzi" is a melody recorded in the Japanese language by South Korean young lady bunch Girls' Generation for their second Japanese-language studio collection, "Young ladies and Peace" (2012). It was discharged as the collection's lead single on June 27, 2012. Composed by Fredrik Thomander, Johan Becker, and Junji Ishiwatari, and delivered by Miles Walker, the track was depicted as an electropop and R&B tune. To advance the single, Girls' Generation showed up on Japanese music programs "Music Station" and "Hello! Hello! Hello! Music Champ", while a music video for the tune coordinated by Toshiyuki Suzuki debuted on June 10, 2012 so as to go with the arrival of the tune. 

Upon its discharge, "Paparazzi" got blended audits from music pundits, who contrasted the tune with the gathering's past Japanese-language single "Mr. Taxi" in 2011. The track was positioned number 19 on "Turn's" rundown of top 20 K-pop tunes of 2012. The single was a business achievement in Japan, cresting on the Japan Hot 100 and at number two on both the Oricon Singles Chart and RIAJ Digital Track Chart. "Paparazzi" was confirmed Gold in Japan for the offers of the single's advanced and physical discharge, individually. 

"Paparazzi" is a tune recorded in the Japanese language, which was portrayed as a crossover of electropop and R&B. It was composed by Swedish musicians Fredrik Thomander and Johan Becker, while creation was dealt with by American maker Miles Walker. Japanese lyricist Junji Ishiwatari gave extra composition credits. The track was discharged as the lead single from the gathering's second Japanese-language studio collection, "Young ladies and Peace" (2012), as a component of the gathering's attack into the Japanese music industry. It was discharged for CD and DVD deals in Japan by Nayutawave Records, which is partnered with Universal Music Group, on June 27, 2012. The tune was made accessible for advanced buy internationally around the same time. "Paparazzi" was likewise discharged in Hong Kong, Taiwan, and South Korea in mid-2012 under permit by Universal Music Hong Kong, Universal Music Taiwan, and S.M. Amusement, separately. 

To advance the single, Girls' Generation performed "Paparazzi" on the Japanese music program "Music Station" on June 22, 2012, where the gathering wore tuxedos and pink gloves. On July 9, 2012, the gathering arranged their second execution of the melody on Fuji Television's "Hello! Hello! Hello! Music Champ", where the individuals wore tuxedos with dark gloves. The going with music video for "Paparazzi" was coordinated by Toshiyuki Suzuki and is just about seven minutes in length. In the video, Girls' Generation performs in front of an audience in a theater, with the set motivated by exemplary musicals. The video starts with the individuals wearing channel coats and "capriciously skipping" to Gene Kelly's "Singin' in the Rain". Amid the primary execution of "Paparazzi", the video is intercut with scenes of the individuals being trailed by picture takers. They perform in two distinct outfits – showgirl-motivated ensembles and tuxedos with pink gloves. Jeff Benjamin from "Bulletin" adulated the move schedules for their "flawless nine-piece synchronization" and opined that the pink gloves of the young ladies took after those ragged by Marilyn Monroe. 

Upon its discharge, "Paparazzi" got blended audits from music faultfinders. Jeff Benjamin from "Board" named it a "high-vitality" track. James Hadfield, composing for the Tokyo release of "Break", contrasted the tune's R&B styles with those of the gathering's past 2011 Japanese-language single "Mr. Taxi" and considered it a "revival" of the last single, composing that "you'd battle to spot numerous genuine upgrades." 

"Paparazzi" was a business accomplishment in Japan, appearing at number two on the Oricon Singles Chart on the graph issue dated July 9, 2012; the main position had a place with KAT-TUN's single "To the Limit". The next week, it dropped to number ten. "Paparazzi" turned into the 58th top of the line physical single of 2012 on the Oricon diagram, selling 136,181 duplicates. 

The single appeared at number 31 on the "Announcement" Japan Hot 100 on July 2, 2012. The next week, it ascended to the top position on the diagram. On the diagram issue dated July 16, 2012, the single dropped to number seven. "Paparazzi" positioned at number 50 on the year-end diagram of 2012. The track also outlined at number two on the "Board" Japan Hot Singles Sales, number five on the "Announcement" Japan Adult Contemporary Airplay, and number two on the RIAJ Digital Track Chart. As indicated by Nielsen SoundScan, "Paparazzi" has sold 103,000 advanced duplicates in Japan starting at July 2012. 

Credits adjusted from the CD issue's liner notes