2008 Indian Premier League Final 

The 2008 Indian Premier League Final was multi day/night Twenty20 cricket coordinate played between the Rajasthan Royals and the Chennai Super Kings on 1 June 2008 at the DY Patil Stadium, Navi Mumbai to decide the champ of the 2008 Indian Premier League, an expert Twenty20 cricket association in India. It finished as the Royals crushed the Super Kings by three wickets. 

The Royals, captained by Shane Warne, topped the gathering stage table, while the Super Kings, driven by Mahendra Singh Dhoni, remained at the third position. They had crushed the Delhi Daredevils and the Kings XI Punjab individually in the semi-finals. 

Winning the hurl, Royals' skipper Shane Warne picked to handle first. The Super Kings scored 163 keeps running in 20 overs with lost 5 wickets. Batting at number three, Suresh Raina top scored for the Super Kings with 43 runs. Royals' bowler Yusuf Pathan took three wickets for 22 runs. The Royals neglected to construct a decent opening association. Be that as it may, because of commitments from the center request, it achieved the triumphant aggregate in the last ball and earned the 2008 Indian Premier League title. Pathan, who was the best entertainer for the Royals with both bat and ball, was named the man of the match. 

The Super Kings began its battle with four successive successes, however lost its next three matches to the Daredevils, the Royals and the Deccan Chargers. It fit the bill for the elimination rounds in the wake of winning four of its last seven class matches. The Royals lost its first match in the gathering stage to the Daredevils. Be that as it may, it won the majority of its next five matches. At that point, it endured a thrashing against the Mumbai Indians, yet proceeded to win its next six matches. It lost the last gathering stage coordinate against the Kings XI. 

The two groups confronted each other in two matches of the gathering stage, the two of which were won by the Royals. The Royals had played a match in the competition before at the DY Patil Stadium; it lost the match by seven wickets. The Super Kings played at the arena without precedent for the finals. 

The Royals played the Daredevils in the principal semi-last. The Daredevils won the hurl and chose to handle first. The Royals got an opening association of 65 runs. Its center request batsmen Shane Watson and Yusuf Pathan scored 52 and 45 runs separately to enable it to hoard 192 keeps running for the loss of 9 wickets. Batting second, the Daredevils lost its initial five batsmen for only 55 runs. Tillakaratne Dilshan top-scored for the Daredevils with 33 runs. The Daredevils was amazed out in the seventeenth for only 87 runs, and gave its partner a 105-run triumph. Watson, who took 3/10, had the best bowling figures for the Royals, and was granted the man of the counterpart for his inside and out execution. 

In the second semi-last, Super Kings played the Kings XI. The Kings XI won the hurl and chose to bat first, however its best six batsman fizzled and just a solitary one of them achieved twofold figures. Be that as it may, because of huge commitments from the lower-request, Punjab figured out how to achieve an aggregate of 112/8. Super Kings quick bowler Manpreet Gony took 3 wickets by yielding only 14 runs. In answer, Super Kings lost its first wicket when Vidyut Sivaramakrishnan were expelled for 6 runs. Notwithstanding, both Parthiv Patel and Suresh Raina scored 50 years each and took the Super Kings to the objective with 31 balls to save. The Super Kings won the match by nine wickets, and Makhaya Ntini was given the man of the match grant. 

The match was facilitated by Mumbai in light of the fact that the establishment proprietor of the Mumbai Indians set the most astounding offer for obtaining, which was 111.9 million. Prior to the match, ESPNCricinfo colleague proofreader Nagraj Gollapudi recognized the Royals as the in all probability champ. Notwithstanding being viewed as the dark horses, the Royals completed at the highest point of the alliance table, and won 11 coordinates out of 14 with 22. The Super Kings stood third, behind Kings XI, getting 16 from eight successes. There were two changes in the Royals' playing eleven for the last; Graeme Smith and Mahesh Rawat were supplanted by Kamran Akmal and Niraj Patel. Smith was led out of the match as he was experiencing hamstring damage. The Super Kings handled a similar side as in its semi-last win over the Kings XI. 

In spite of the way that the home group Mumbai Indians was not playing, the match pulled in an enormous number of onlookers. They were presented to exhibitions by Amrita Arora, Shamita Shetty, Dia Mirza, Salman Khan and Cirque du Soleil. At that point a laser show was composed. The match was multi day/night coordinate, and began at 20:18 Indian Standard Time (IST) (). The hurl occurred at 20:00 IST within the sight of Lalit Modi and match arbitrator Javagal Srinath. Modi flipped the coin, and Royals' commander Warne called heads; the coin ended up being heads, and Warne won the hurl. 

Sunil Gavaskar had said in his match report that the batsmen will be required to play more on the front foot due to the capricious ricochet. The pitch was sketchy, and Warne handled first. The Super Kings lost its first batsman as Sivaramakrishnan went out for 16 runs. He was gotten by Ravindra Jadeja when Pathan was up. Sivaramakrishnan destroyed a quick ball to profound mid-wicket, and Jadeja took a "well-made a decision about catch". Sivaramakrishnan made 16 keeps running in 14 balls at a strike rate of 114.28, and played an opening organization of 39 keeps running with P. Patel. From that point onward, Raina joined P. Patel, and them two made 25 keeps running for the second wicket association with a run rate of 6.81. P. Patel was gotten in the last wad of the ninth over. Like the past wicket, Pathan bowled a level and quick ball, P. Patel attempted to play it towards the third man. Be that as it may, the ball edged towards the wicket-attendant Akmal, who at first failed, however gotten it a while later. P. Patel made 38 keeps running in 33 balls and hit five limits. The following wicket was of Albie Morkel, who made 16 comes up short on 13 balls. Pathan again bowled a level quick ball, which was top edged by Morkel. The ball went into the air, and was in the long run gotten by Akmal. Anyway this brought about the impact of Akmal and Mohammad Kaif as both were endeavoring to take the catch, and them two got harmed. Four overs later, Jadeja got Raina on Watson, breaking a 33 runs fourth wicket organization among him and commander Mahendra Singh Dhoni. Watson bowled a full length ball outside off stump. Raina played it towards long off, yet neglected to get enough separation and Jadeja captured the ball at the limit. Chamara Kapugedera joined Dhoni after the expulsion of Raina, a choice which "punctured" the energy in the trudge overs. Kapugedera made eight keeps running by acing 12 balls, before being gotten by Swapnil Asnodkar on Sohail Tanvir. Tanvir bowled a calculating slower ball, which was flung on the front foot by Kapugedera. The ball was gotten by long-on defender Asnodkar. With the last five balls staying in the innings, Dhoni and Subramaniam Badrinath together made 15 runs, and Badrinath made six keeps running off two balls. Dhoni made 29 runs not out, confronting 17 balls, in which he hit two fours and one six. Pathan had the best figures with the ball for the Royals, as he took three wickets for 22 keeps running in four overs. Tanvir and Watson got one wicket each and gave 40 and 29 runs separately. Warne gave 34 keeps running in his four overs, yet neglected to get any wicket. Munaf Patel and Siddharth Trivedi gave 14 and 21 runs separately in their two overs each. 

In answer, the Royals lost its first batsman as N. Patel went out in the wake of scoring two keeps running in 11 balls. Manpreet Gony bowled a full length ball outside the off stump, which hit the leg stump in the wake of getting an inside edge as N. Patel picked to pull it. He went out in the main bundle of the fourth finished, leaving his group at 19 keeps running with loss of one wicket. The Royals lost its second opener when Raina got Asnodkar as he hit a full and wide ball by Morkel to point. He made 28 runs confronting 20 balls. In the equivalent over, Makhaya Ntini ran out Akmal with an immediate hit. Akmal played the ball to mid-on, yet Ntini coasted downwards and tossed the ball at the stumps. After the fall of Akmal's wicket, Watson and Pathan began playing all the more forcefully, and scored 65 keeps running for a fourth wicket organization at a run rate of 8.66; this was likewise the most astounding association of the match. In the eleventh over, Raina dropped Pathan on Murlitharan at profound midwicket. Toward the finish of the thirteenth over, the Royals achieved a score of 100 runs. In the fifteenth over, Muralitharan broke the association as he bowled Watson; the ball hit the leg stump. The following wicket was of Kaif, who was gotten by Dhoni on Muralitharan. Kaif pushed a level doosra, and Dhoni took a basic catch at spread. In the following ball, Jadeja went out for a brilliant duck. Morkel bowled a short ball, and Jadeja endeavored to pull it. Anyway the ball went to mid-on, and Kapugedera got the ball in the wake of running towards his left. In the equivalent over, Raina ran out Pathan with an immediate hit at the stumps. Morkel bowled a full ball which was pushed by Warne to point. He kept running for a solitary, yet Raina hit the stumps, running out off-striker Pathan. Pathan went out scoring 50 years; he made 56 runs out off 39 balls with a strike rate of 143.58 and hit three fours and four sixes. The Royals required 18 keeps running toward the finish of the eighteenth over. The second last over was bowled by Ntini, in which he surrendered ten runs. In the last wad of the over, Ntini bowled a decent length ball, and Warne hit a four by Warne at spread. In the last finished, the Royals required eight runs, and Dhoni gave the ball to Lakshmipathy Balaji. Six runs were required from the last three balls, however Balaji bowled a wide outside off stump, which was missed by the wicket-manager P. Patel. This brought about two additional runs. In the following ball, Warne hit a full ball for a run. The Royals required three keeps running from the last two balls. Tanvir played the fifth legitimate conveyance of the over, which was a calculating full hurl. Tanvir hit the ball at the long leg, and ran two runs. The Royals required one more kept running off the keep going ball, with Tanvir protesting; Balaji bowled him a short ball. Warne had effectively secured the half separation of the pitch when Tanvir hit the ball. The two batsmen kept running for a solitary and the Royals won the match. Them two remained not out with nine runs each. Morkel and Muralitharan got two wickets each, giving 25 and 39 runs individually. Gony got one wicket, while Ntini and Balaji had none. 

Pathan got the honor for most extreme sixes in a match; he hit four sixes in the match. He was likewise named the man of the Match. 

Key 

The Royals got and a trophy for being the heroes. Royals' players got their decorations from Sharad Pawar in the post-coordinate function. Warne stated: 

It's been an awesome voyage. We're gelled together actually rapidly. It does right by me to see such a significant number of youthful folks learning and executing their abilities in the center. I thoroughly consider the groups all India have made the climate stunning. Congrats to Chennai. It's been a magnificent ride for us. Royals' Tanvir was given the purple top for getting the most elevated number of wickets in the group. Watson was announced as the man of the arrangement; he scored 474 runs and took 17 wickets in the season. The Super Kings got for being the sprinters up. Dhoni stated: 

I think the standard of our cricket was great. We were sufficient in the finals. We lost as a group. There were a couple of blunders in batting and bowling. We're not by any stretch of the imagination troubled or hindered by it. We'll return to our lodging and appreciate it. That is the thing that sport is about. the reaction from our group was incredible. indeed, even the folks who didn't get an opportunity were totally behind the group. So the soul was incredible." 

The two groups fit the bill for the 2008 Champions League Twenty20. Be that as it may, the competition was dropped because of the 2008 Mumbai assaults and the two groups were given each as pay.