Keggy the Keg 

Keggy the Keg is the informal mascot of Dartmouth College, an Ivy League college in Hanover, New Hampshire, United States. Keggy is a human brew barrel, made in 2003 by individuals from the school humor magazine the "Dartmouth Jack-O-Lantern", to fill the mascot void that pursued the annulment of the Indian mascot in 1971. Because of its temperament, the mascot was dubious on Dartmouth's grounds, and it was accounted for on in an assortment of national media. With time, be that as it may, it has turned into an "imbued part of Dartmouth culture". 

Subsequent to dropping the mascot of the Indian, Dartmouth had no official mascot. Dartmouth kept on being known by its moniker of "The Big Green," in any case, refering to the vagueness, absence of dynamism, and elusiveness of having no mascot, the Dartmouth Student Assembly proposed an understudy survey in spring 2003 to settle on another mascot. While the Moose came in first in this survey, numerous understudies stayed disappointed with the decision, and the moose lost a last survey to "no mascot." Chris Plehal and Nic Duquette, understudies at the "Jack-O-Lantern" humor magazine, communicated enthusiasm for making a mascot that "wasn't supremacist, one-sided or misogynist, yet [was] completely unsatisfactory." with an end goal to constrain the organization to embrace an all the more intriguing mascot, they made Keggy, a human barrel that speaks to "the most evident Dartmouth generalization: the lager swilling "Creature House" crew culture." 

Response to Keggy's presentation was blended: the understudy body president actually supported Keggy in the mascot look, while the College paper "The Dartmouth" detailed a blended understudy response and distributed contradicting assessments. The paper additionally gave an account of "fire" over the mascot from College overseers, however the Dean of the College praised the understudies' ability to "concoct inventive and imaginative thoughts." 

Keggy accordingly gotten media consideration past the College at other Ivy League papers and on a few national news sources. Michael Wilbon of ESPN's "Exoneration the Interruption" called Keggy "some moronic brew thing," and "Playboy" magazine distributed an element on Keggy as a major aspect of a "Mascots Talk Back" arrangement. A posting of a photograph of Keggy on CollegeHumor was well sufficiently known to get status as a National Pick. 

In August, 2012 Yahoo Sports positioned Keggy the Keg as the #1 Most Unique Mascot. 

Not long after Keggy's presentation in 2003, a gathering of understudies stole the Keggy ensemble from its home in the Sigma Nu organization library and sent compromising notes to Keggy's makers, including photos of the mascot bound and choked with one bruised eye. Some believed this to be an exposure stunt by the makers, however the mascot had genuinely been stolen. Keggy was in the long run come back with minor harm to the outfit. 

Keggy kept on showing up at Dartmouth games, and turned into an "imbued part of Dartmouth culture": at Dartmouth's 2005 Winter Carnival festivity, understudies named the snow model of an extensive ship "Skipper Keggy's Carnival Cruiser." In mid 2006, College authorities denied Keggy access to a sold-out hockey match-up (authorities refered to flame code worries with the limit swarm), provoking a "Jack-O-Lantern"- wrote publication in "The Dartmouth" denouncing the episode; the "Jack-O-Lantern" site claimed "hostile to barrel bigotry." A comparable occurrence happened in October 2006 when Keggy was not allowed on the field at halftime of the Homecoming football match-up, again bringing about further grievances in "The Dartmouth" and on the "Jack-O-Lantern" site. 

The ensemble vanished before the fall term of 2008 and has not been seen or returned since. The Jack-O-Lantern assembled a substitution ensemble and uncovered it at the 2009 Winter Carnival.