Terry Bywater 

Terrance "Terry" Bywater (brought into the world 28 February 1983) is a British wheelchair b-ball player. He took an interest in the 2000 Summer Paralympics, where his group came in fourth spot; in the 2004 Summer Paralympics, where he won a bronze decoration and was the most astounding scorer for Great Britain; the 2008 Summer Paralympics, winning another bronze award; and the 2012 Summer Paralympics, where his group again came in fourth spot. 

Bywater was conceived on 28 February 1983 in Dormanstown, England and as of now lives in Cleveland, North Yorkshire. , he gauges and is tall. He was conceived without a tibia and a fibula in his left leg, which was cut off when he was two. He has a child, Benjamin Bywater. 

Bywater started playing wheelchair b-ball at 13 years old at an open day in Middlesbrough with the Teesside Lions. He later played with them. In the wake of playing for a year, he was chosen for the Great Britain Under-23 group and started preparing. He made his introduction at the Sydney 2000 Summer Paralympics, and completed fourth. He took an interest in the 2008 Summer Paralympics in Beijing, where he won a bronze award, and was the top Great Britain scorer in the occasion. He presently plays for the Sheffield Steelers. He once played for C. D. Fundosa in Spain, alongside numerous other European clubs. Bywater came back to England so he could play with the Super League Club Sheffield Steelers all through the 2011—12 season. He is a 4.5 point player. 

His first titles were the 2001/2002 European Championships in Amsterdam, Netherlands, where he completed fourth. In 2002 he went to the World Championships in Kitakyushu in Japan, where he completed second (silver). He took an interest in the 2003 European Championships in Sassari, Italy, and won bronze. He contended in the 2005 European Championships in Paris, France, and won silver. He contended in the 2006 World Championships in Amsterdam and was fifth spot, and in 2007 he took an interest in the European Championships in Wetzlar, Netherlands, and got a silver award. After two years, he won bronze in the European Championships of Adana in Turkey. In 2010, out of the blue, he took an interest in the World Wheelchair Basketball Championships in Birmingham, and was fifth spot. He won gold in the 2011 European Championships in Nazareth, Israel. At the 2012 Summer Olympics in London, the wheelchair ball crew lost to the United States, and completed in fourth position, in the wake of losing to Canada, passing up a major opportunity of the finals. He said that not winning a decoration at the Paralympics was the "most exceedingly terrible minute" of his profession.