Sea Village Marina, Gibraltar 

The Ocean Village Marina is one of three marinas in the British Overseas Territory of Gibraltar, at the southern end of the Iberian Peninsula. In the past Sheppard's Marina, it is situated in the Bay of Gibraltar, between the North Mole of Gibraltar Harbor and the runway of Gibraltar International Airport. Both Ocean Village Marina and the adjoining Marina Bay have been joined into the Ocean Village Project, an extravagance resort. 

Sea Village Marina and the contiguous Marina Bay together have 330 billets, with a draft (or draft) of . The marina can oblige vessels up to long. There are three private towers with blue glass overhangs disregarding the marina: Grand Ocean Plaza, Imperial Plaza, and Majestic Plaza. On 4 June 2012, Ocean Village Marina facilitated 161 vessels which framed the Gibraltar Diamond Jubilee Flotilla, commending sixty years of the Queen's rule. 

Gibraltar has three marinas: Marina Bay, Ocean Village Marina, and Queensway Quay Marina. Sea Village Marina is situated on Gibraltar's Westside, outside the northern end of Gibraltar Harbor, in the Bay of Gibraltar, alongside the airplane terminal runway. It is neighboring Marina Bay which is simply to its north. The marina frames some portion of the Ocean Village Project or Ocean Village Marina Complex, regularly alluded to as just Ocean Village. Sea Village Marina is the previous Sheppard's Marina or Sheppard's Yard. Both Marina Bay and Ocean Village Marina have been fused into Ocean Village, between the North Mole and the airplane terminal runway. The vital area of the marina offers security from dampness loaded Levanter winds. 

Sea Village Marina was earlier Sheppard's Marina, claimed by H. Sheppard and Co. By 2004, the marina had been sold to Ocean Village Investments Ltd and decimation had initiated. The marina held its unique name, in any event casually, for quite a long while after the deal. The closeout of Sheppard's Marina was not without contention, as certain occupants of the marina were in the end removed from their billets by the new proprietors. After Ocean Village Investments gained the adjoining Marina Bay in 2006, the two marinas were consolidated into Ocean Village, a retreat with private, retail, and relaxation offices. 

On 4 June 2012, the Ocean Village Marina facilitated 161 vessels which framed the Gibraltar Diamond Jubilee Flotilla, praising sixty years of the Queen's rule. The flotilla occurred one day after a comparable occasion in London up the Thames. The merriments began authoritatively with welcome from Gregory Butcher, originator of Ocean Village, and Ros Astengo, occasion coordinator of Ocean Village. The Gibraltar Port Authority tended to those gathered on the subject of security, and made suggestions in regards to safeguards which went from sunscreen to the separation between vessels. The flotilla withdrew from the marina at early afternoon, cruising from the western side of the runway, passing Europa Point, and returning in the wake of achieving the eastern side of the runway. Vessels up to took an interest in the flotilla. Little pontoons drove the flotilla, trailed by power vessels over , and, at last, cruising vessels. The "General Elliot", a Gibraltar Port Authority vessel, was at the leader of the flotilla, and was upheld by other authority vessels. 

Sea Village Marina and the adjoining Marina Bay together have 330 billets, with a draft of . The marina can oblige vessels up to long. The marina presently offers chief billets, most of which are between and , in spite of the fact that the biggest can oblige vessels up to long. The Yacht Reporting Berth for Gibraltar shut in 2005 and traditions leeway of vessels is currently performed by the individual marinas. Each compartment at Ocean Village Marina offers utilities which incorporate metered water and power, just as access to satellite TV, phone, fax, and Wi-Fi. Different civilities incorporate clothing and attendant services. Gas and diesel are accessible at the quayside. 

Notwithstanding the marina, the Ocean Village resort highlights three private towers, with blue glass galleries, that likewise have business space: Grand Ocean Plaza, Imperial Plaza, and Majestic Plaza. Development of another World Trade Center in Ocean Village was planned to start in 2012. The improvement has an assortment of eateries, bars, and retail outlets, just as official office space. Recreation Island, on recovered land, has a business focus and gambling club, among different offices. 

Sheppard's of Gibraltar, the previous proprietor of the marina which was built up in 1961, still has a nearness there. The business offers help administrations for yacht proprietors from both their chandlery and shipyard divisions. Their chandlery shop on the ground floor of Marina Court at Ocean Village has an assortment of items for yacht hardware and support. Their shipyard on Coaling Island close Queensway Quay Marina performs fix administrations, for example, motor revamps, apparatus, welding, and painting. Sheppard's takes care of yachts at all three of Gibraltar's marinas, and furthermore has a 40-ton lift when pull outs are required. Their pull out work incorporates body cleaning, substitution of anodes or transducers, and slurry impacting, among different administrations. Pull outs are performed at both Coaling Island and the North Mole.