2012 MAC Championship Game 

The 2012 Marathon MAC Championship Game was an American football match-up hung on November 30, 2012 at Ford Field in Detroit, Michigan between the West Division champion Northern Illinois Huskies and the East Division champion Kent State Golden Flashes to decide the Mid-American Conference (MAC) champion. This is the first run through since 2003 that the two groups entered the amusement positioned in the BCS standings, AP Poll, and Coaches' Poll. 

The pre-diversion development concentrated basically on the two powerful offenses, the two of which were driven by solid hurrying assaults. The hurrying assaults contrasted; Northern Illinois' was driven by junior quarterback Jordan Lynch, who completed fourth in the country in surging, while Kent State's was driven by a running back couple comprising of Dri Archer and Trayion Durham. The opening line favored Northern Illinois by seven. In the wake of being tied toward the finish of guideline, the amusement went into two additional time periods and inevitably closed with Northern Illinois winning 44–37. The Huskies were accordingly welcome to the 2013 Orange Bowl. 

Different news sources theorized that if Kent State won, it could acquire a BCS bowl offer. Under then-current BCS rules, the most astounding positioned group from outside the six "AQ" gatherings got a programmed everywhere BCS offer on the off chance that it was (1) in the main 16 of the last BCS rankings and (2) positioned higher than something like one hero of an AQ meeting. 

Kent State had entered the few days of November 24 positioned 23rd in the BCS standings, yet after each group positioned somewhere in the range of 15 and 21 lost that day, the Golden Flashes rose to seventeenth in the November 25 rankings, with Northern Illinois ascending to 21st. In the meantime, no group from the Big East, which had a programmed spot in a BCS bowl, was in the main 25. The groups positioned quickly ahead and behind Kent State, UCLA and Texas, needed to play higher-positioned groups out and about amid the title end of the week. UCLA visited eighth positioned Stanford in the Pac-12 Championship Game, and Texas visited 6th positioned Kansas State to end the two groups' ordinary seasons. In light of Northern Illinois' positioning entering the diversion, it had not been at first felt that the Huskies would most likely bounce into the best 16 with a success, even with misfortunes by UCLA and Texas. 

Both UCLA and Texas would lose their particular amusements; additionally, Nebraska, which had entered the Big Ten Championship Game at No. 12 in the BCS, was smothered 70–31 by a Wisconsin group that entered the diversion at 7–5. The majority of this opened the entryway for the champ of the MAC amusement to enter the best 16. Northern Illinois won and vaulted to #15 in the BCS Standings, procuring a spot in the 2013 Orange Bowl. The billet was the first ever for a MAC group in a BCS diversion, and was likewise the first BCS compartment ever for a one-misfortune non-AQ group. 

Kent State agreed to the GoDaddy.com Bowl. 

Northern Illinois completed tenth in the country in all out offense, completing the season with 6,574 absolute yards. Their prosperity can to a great extent be credited to their star quarterback, junior Jordan Lynch, who accomplished first-group all-MAC respects and was named the MAC Offensive Player of the Year. He completed in the best 30 broadly in passing yards, touchdowns, finishing rate, and passer rating. Maybe Lynch's best commitment, in any case, was in the hurrying diversion, where he amassed 1815 yards which was fourth in the nation, and best among quarterbacks. Two other running backs, the two youngsters, made commitments in the hurrying amusement too: Leighton Settle and Akeem Daniels. His driving recipient was senior Martel Moore who, amid the season, turned into the principal Northern Illinois beneficiary to outperform 1,000 yards getting since 2005, and drove the group with 75 gatherings for 1,083 yards. The Huskies' hostile line was moored by left handle Tyler Loos, who accomplished second-group all-meeting honors. 

Composed by Jay Niemann, the Huskies' guard was driven by linemen Alan Baxter and Sean Progar, who totaled 9.5 and 8.5 sacks separately, just as cautious back Jimmie Ward, every one of whom accomplished all-gathering praises. Northern Illinois completed tied for tenth in the nation with 38 sacks on the season. Altogether, Northern Illinois surrendered 19.9 focuses, positioning 21st in the nation. 

Kent State was driven essentially by junior running back Dri Archer, who accomplished first group all-MAC awards. Toxophilite, who is 5'8" (1.73 m) and , totaled 1429 yards and 16 touchdowns, the two of which positioned in the main 20 in the FBS. Toxophilite was portrayed by SBNation.com's Mike Breese as a "dynamic do-it-all entertainer". Kent State's other first-group all-meeting entertainer was senior hostile gatekeeper Brian Winters. The Golden Flashes' quarterback was senior Spencer Keith, who tossed 12 touchdowns and 10 block attempts altogether. Their strong surging assault had an extra part, Trayion Durham, who accomplished third-group all-MAC by scrambling for 1316 hurrying yards and 14 touchdowns on the season. The Golden Flashes' driving recipient was additionally Archer. Their driving wide collector was a first year recruit, Josh Boyle. 

Notwithstanding a dreary exhibition all through the season as far as all out protection (where they completed 74th) and scoring guard (where they completed 44th), they created the second-most turnovers in the nation with 38 which trailed just Oregon. From an individual viewpoint, junior security Luke Wollet drove the group with four capture attempts and accomplished second-group all-MAC respects. For the third sequential season, cautious lineman Roosevelt Nix accomplished first-group all-meeting praises. Amid the season, he totaled 6 sacks just as 15 handles for misfortune. 

Northern Illinois got this show on the road the ball to begin the amusement and, after three plays totaling three yards, were compelled to punt, going three-and-out. Kent State's first drive likewise brought about a three-and-out. The Huskies took over at their very own 14 on the resulting drive and figured out how to accomplish one initially down before punting. The primary scoring drive happened for the Golden Flashes on their second drive, however they were helped by Huskies' punt returner Angelo Sebastiano bumbling a Kent State punt. They exploited the slip-up and at last scored on a 15-yard touchdown kept running by Dri Archer. After the Huskies neglected to score on their next drive, Kent State promoted again on a 37-yard field objective by Freddy Cortez. The last drive of the primary quarter kept going 14 plays for 65 yards and finished in a Mathew Sims 27-yard field objective. 

Kent State went three-and-out on their first drive of the second quarter. Northern Illinois' resulting drive profited by their solid field position (their very own 41-yard line) by executing a 6-play, 59-yard drive that finished in a 14-yard go from Jordan Lynch to Martel Moore that tied the amusement at 10. Kent State submitted another miscue on their next drive, tossing a capture to Dechane Durante. Northern Illinois again promoted, this time with a 12-play, 58-yard drive coming full circle with a 1-yard surge by Akeem Daniels. That drive would be the last scoring drive of the half, at which the score was Northern Illinois Huskies 17, Kent State Golden Flashes 10. 

Since NIU got this show on the road the ball to begin the amusement, Kent State got it to begin the second half and kicked it into high gear the ball at their very own 47 after a 28-yard return by Josh Boyle. Kent State got this show on the road the ball into the red zone, in any case made due with a field objective which slice NIU's lead to 4. Northern Illinois' productive offense proceeded with their scoring by executing a 10-play, 75-yard drive featured by a 44-yard kept running by Lynch on a fourth and 1. Lynch would run it into the end zone for a 1-yard touchdown three plays later. After the Golden Flashes went three-and-out, the Huskies scored, this time by means of a 29-yard field objective by Sims. 

After Kent State turned the ball over on downs, Northern Illinois, without precedent for the second half, did not score and punted the ball away. Kent State started a rebound on their resulting drive through a 5-yard touchdown drive Spencer Keith, making the score 27-20. Northern Illinois' next drive kept going just a single play, a bobble by Jordan Lynch that was returned by Kent State protector Zack Hitchens for a touchdown. After Cortez made the additional point, the diversion was tied at 27. The Huskies refocused by scoring a touchdown, a 9-yard kept running by Lynch, yet the Golden Flashes reacted with one of their own, a 19-yard go from Keith to Tim Erjavec. Toward the finish of guideline, the score was tied at 34. 

Per NCAA extra time controls, each group took care of business the ball at their own 25-yard line for one drive. In the primary extra time frame, Kent State got this show on the road the ball down to the NIU 5 preceding kicking a 33-yard field objective. Northern Illinois reacted with their very own field objective, a 40-yarder by Sims. After the main additional time, the score was tied at 37. NIU got this show on the road the ball to begin the second extra time, and took just two plays to score a touchdown: a 23-yard kept running by Akeem Daniels pursued by a 2-yard kept running by Lynch, his third touchdown of the diversion. Kent State at that point needed to score a touchdown so as to constrain the amusement to a third extra time. They were ineffective in doing as such, be that as it may, as on fourth and 8, Keith tossed a block attempt, along these lines finishing the diversion with the Northern Illinois Huskies triumphant by a score of 44-37.