Eeyore's Birthday Party 

Eeyore's Birthday Party is multi day-long celebration occurring yearly in Austin, Texas since 1963. It regularly happens on the last Saturday of April in Austin's Pease District Park. It incorporates unrecorded music, sustenance and drink distributing which advantage neighborhood non-benefit associations, participants in vivid outfits, and extensive drum circles. The occasion is frequented by youngsters and families, with explicit occasions introduced for them by the occasion coordinators. The celebration is named to pay tribute to Eeyore, a character in A. A. Milne's Winnie-the-Pooh stories. 

Eeyore's Birthday Party started in 1963 as a spring gathering and outing before the start of ‘dead week’, facilitated by Plan 2 understudies and personnel, and first driven by Lloyd Birdwell, an English educator at the University of Texas at Austin. It was named for Eeyore, a constantly discouraged jackass in A. A. Milne's Winnie-the-Pooh stories who, in one story, trusts his companions have overlooked his birthday just to find they host arranged an unexpected gathering for him. In spite of its name, the occasion does not fall on the official birthday of the anecdotal character. The first occasion highlighted a trashcan brimming with lemonade, brew, nectar sandwiches, a live, blossom hung jackass, and a may shaft (with regards to the occasion's nearness to May Day). For a long time the gathering was an UT convention, however in this way the yearly Birthday Party turned into a custom in Austin's nonconformist subculture. 

At the point when the celebration moved from Eastwoods Park to Pease District Park in 1974, Austin-territory non-benefit Friends of the Forest Foundation, an association which conveys assets to other zone philanthropies, started orchestrating sustenance and drink merchants at the celebration. They proceed with this errand today alongside masterminding open administrations (toilets, transports, security, doctors) and planning unrecorded music and family-arranged amusements and challenges. The occasion is as yet referred to most as a celebration arranged towards present day flower children. It presently flaunts a yearly participation in the thousands. 

After some time, the celebration has outgrown its unique originators. It is presently supported by the Friends of the Forest Foundation. 

Drummers bring a wide assortment of instruments from hand drums to kettledrums. What began as a little cookout for University of Texas at Austin understudies has today swelled to a noteworthy yearly celebration with live groups, non-benefit sellers of sustenance, drink and neighborhood brews, just as a youngsters' zone finished with expressions and artworks and jamboree diversions, family-arranged recreations and challenges, for example, ensemble challenges, and an egg hurl. Participation at the Birthday Party is free. Assuming the rainclouds blow over, it happens on the last Saturday in April in Pease District Park; a downpour date is booked for the next end of the week. Brilliant and assorted ensembles are normal. With regards to the first customs of the occasion, a live jackass and a may shaft are constantly present. The occasion starts in the late morning and proceeds until sunset. Sustenance and beverages are sold nearby by neighborhood Austin 501c-3 non-benefit gatherings. Sanitized water is accessible on location for members to fill their own compartments. Because of the absence of stopping in the zone and the high participation, the Friends of the Forest Foundation gives merry transport transports between state parking areas only north of the legislative center structure and Pease Park. Singing of people and excursion melodies is energized on the short transport ride. 

Eeyore's Birthday Party is gone to by individuals from a wide assortment of foundations and ages, some of whom may have been going to for a considerable length of time. Austin's radical network still puts in a noteworthy appearance at the occasion, which they celebrate by framing substantial drum circles which can once in a while contain several drummers and artists in the expansive territories of the recreation center not involved by different occasions. Individuals from the Deaf people group like the drum circles since they can feel the vibrations. 

Starting at 2008, the occasion has additionally spread to Seattle's Cal Anderson Park as a yearly festival.