Attarintiki Daredi 

Attarintiki Daredi () is a 2013 Indian Telugu-language masala movie composed and coordinated by Trivikram Srinivas. It stars Pawan Kalyan, Samantha Akkineni and Pranitha Subhash in the number one spot jobs with Nadhiya, Boman Irani and Brahmanandam in supporting jobs. 

The film was delivered by B. V. S. N. Prasad under the standard Sri Venkateswara Cine Chitra in relationship with Reliance Entertainment. The soundtrack collection and foundation score were made by Devi Sri Prasad. Prasad Murella was the cinematographer. The film centers around Gautham Nanda, a business beneficiary who goes about as a driver in his alienated auntie Sunanda's home to repair her stressed association with his granddad Raghunandan who ousted her for wedding against his desires a long time previously. 

"Attarintiki Daredi" was made with a financial plan of 55 crore (550 million). Important photography started in January 2013 and finished in July 2013, with the film being fundamentally shot in and around Hyderabad. Critical parts were shot in Pollachi and Europe. The film was discharged on 27 September 2013 and got positive basic gathering. It earned an overall offer of 74.48 crore (748.8 million), netted almost 187 crore (1.87 billion), and developed as the most elevated earning Telugu film ever until it was outperformed by "" (2015). 

The film won four Filmfare Awards, six SIIMA Awards, four Nandi Awards, six Santosham Film Awards and the B. Nagi Reddy Memorial Award. It was revamped into Kannada as "Ranna" (2015), in Bengali as "Abhimaan" (2016), and in Tamil as "Vantha Rajavathaan Varuven" (2019). 

Raghunandan is a rich yet miserable agent situated in Milan. He wishes to accommodate with his antagonized little girl Sunanda, whom he ousted in light of the fact that she wedded Rajasekhar against his desires. His grandson Gautham Nanda guarantees Raghunandan that he will take her back to their home on his 80th birthday celebration. Sunanda has three girls; two of them are Prameela and Sashi. Gautham goes into the house as Siddhartha otherwise known as Siddhu, a driver who was named by Rajasekhar in the wake of sparing him from a heart assault. Gautham attempts to charm Prameela, however surrenders when he discovers that she is infatuated with another man. Sashi abhors Gautham and is suspicious of him and Paddu, his companion and an attendant who is delegated to deal with Rajasekhar. 

Sunanda later uncovers to Gautham that she knows about his genuine character much before the episodes, and cautions him to keep away from doing anything with the expectation of returning her to Raghunandan. 

To spare Prameela's adoration, Gautham and Paddu go to a town and inadvertently, Sashi falls into the jeep because of head damage, along these lines enduring with amnesia. Gautham presents himself as her darling until further notice. Sashi trusts it. The trio go to the scene; Gautham and Paddu go into the house. They and the groom escape from that point and achieve Sunanda's home after a rough quarrel with the relatives of the husband where Sashi's memory is restored. The lady of the hour's dad Siddhappa requests remuneration for the harm brought about by Siddhu, to which Sunanda guarantees Sashi's marriage with Siddhappa's senior child. To stay away from complexities, Rajasekhar fires Gautham. Gautham later discovers that Sashi cherished him from the earliest starting point yet was reluctant to express her emotions. He traps Baddham Bhaskar, a rich NRI remaining in Uganda who has a propensity for ladies, and enters Sunanda's home as his right hand. 

Bhaskar succumbs to Sashi however his endeavors are over and over upset by Gautham. Upon the arrival of her marriage, Sashi runs off with Gautham. While hanging tight with him for the train to Chennai, Siddhappa's men achieve the station to stop them just to be destroyed by Gautham and his colleagues, driven by Balu. Through Balu, Sashi comes to know Gautham's genuine intention. A furious Rajasekhar, with Sunanda, land to shoot Gautham however Rajasekhar is shocked in the wake of knowing his actual personality. Gautham uncovers that the day Sunanda left the house, Raghunandan attempted to end it all yet unintentionally killed Gautham's mom. He says that he adored his granddad however he murdered his mom. Sunanda detested him as he harmed Rajasekhar and removed them. 

Sunanda and Rajasekhar understand their imprudence and accommodate with Gautham. Sashi is abducted by four colleagues selected by Bhaskar where she portrays the story to the partners in crime. Gautham and Paddu achieve the spot and Sashi accommodates with Gautham. Bhaskar's riches is seized by the legislature of Uganda and he is left with a similar sum with which he fled from Rajasekhar's home when he helped him before. Raghunandan accommodates with Sunanda, and Gautham is collectively designated as the CEO of the organization on account of Raghunandan and Sunanda's help. The film closes with Gautham holding Raghunandan's hand with love. 

Trivikram Srinivas intended to coordinate Pawan Kalyan in a film delivered by D. V. V. Danayya and portrayed the content in late January 2011. Anyway Trivikram Srinivas later started "Julai" (2012) while Kalyan was chipping away at "Gabbar Singh" (2012) and "Cameraman Gangatho Rambabu" (2012). The specialized team of Kalyan's and Srinivas' past coordinated effort, "Jalsa" (2008), were chosen to chip away at the film. B. V. S. N. Prasad was required to create "Attarintiki Daredi" while Kalyan was relied upon to dispense dates in his timetable from October 2012. Trivikram Srinivas gave completing contacts to the content in late September 2012 and Reliance Entertainment was affirmed to co-produce. Devi Sri Prasad was chosen as the music chief and the music sittings were held at Barcelona amid the area scout in December 2012. 

"Attarintiki Daredi" was propelled on 23 November 2012 at Venkateswara sanctuary in Film Nagar. The film was accounted for to be on the lines of "Nuvvu Naaku Nachav" (2001) for which Trivikram Srinivas composed the discoursed and the story. Trivikram Srinivas further implied that the content will portray the Telugu culture and customs with a solid message. Prasad Murella dealt with the cinematography and few groupings were given utilizing a Milo mechanical camera which B. V. S. N. Prasad acquired from Mumbai as it was inaccessible in Hyderabad. In mid July 2013, the title was affirmed to be "Attarintiki Daredi". 

Pawan Kalyan decided on a total makeover and wore a look taking after the one he wore in his past movies "Kushi" (2001) and "Jalsa". After Trivikram Srinivas portrayed the content to Kalyan, he asked him who might assume the job of his auntie. also, Trivikram Srinivas answered it would be Nadhiya. Kalyan gave his endorsement for Srinivas' determination and Nadhiya was chosen before she marked her rebound film in Telugu, "Mirchi" (2013). Trivikram Srinivas portrayed the content in a discussion with her via phone. After she acknowledged, he said that he would ask her dates after their timetables were arranged. She later uncovered that she was terrified of being pigeonholed however did the job just on Trivikram Srinivas' diligence and included that the character’s feelings were set great. 

Trivikram Srinivas chose to give Ileana D'Cruz a role as the female lead who worked with him on "Jalsa" and "Julai". Samantha Akkineni was affirmed as the female lead in late October 2012 which denoted her first coordinated effort with Kalyan. The second female lead was yet to be chosen. Before the finish of December 2012, the vast majority of the movies which were in pre-creation stage were affirming their female leads. In view of this the generation unit chose to start the shoot without affirming the other courageous woman. 

Pranitha Subhash was chosen as the second female lead toward the beginning of January 2013 and was affirmed to play Samantha's sister. Pranitha considered it a lifetime opportunity and said that she would be found in an "exceptionally sweet, young lady adjacent character." Boman Irani made his introduction in Telugu with "Attarintiki Daredi"; he played Raghunandan, the granddad of Kalyan's character. Kota Srinivasa Rao assumed the job of Sidhappa Naidu for which he brandished a sensible and rough look. Navika Kotia was chosen for the job of the more youthful sister of Samantha and Pranitha in April 2013. 

Trivikram Srinivas did not cast his customary partner Sunil in the film. Since Sunil's achievement of "Maryada Ramanna" (2010) and "Poola Rangadu" (2012) as a lead performing artist, Srinivas felt that it would not be reasonable for make him play a comic. Rao Ramesh, Mukesh Rishi, Brahmanandam, Ali, M. S. Narayana and Posani Krishna Murali were thrown in supporting jobs. 

Mumtaj and Hamsa Nandini were affirmed to show up in the melody "Its Time To Party" denoting the previous' rebound in Telugu film following 12 years after grapple Anasuya denied the offer. 

B. V. S. N. Prasad expressed amid the film's dispatch that foremost photography would start in mid-December 2012. Kalyan scanned for new areas in Spain as the story requested a remote area and around 30 to 45 days of shooting plan was arranged there. It was the first run through Pawan Kalyan went for an area chase and returned in the most recent seven day stretch of December 2012. Because of obscure reasons, the film's shoot was delayed to 8 January 2013 in late December 2012. 

Shooting at last started from 24 January 2013 at a private lodging in Hyderabad. The group arranged another timetable from 4 February 2013 in Pollachi where scenes on Kalyan, Samantha and other help cast were intended to be shot. The timetable was deferred to 15 February 2013 and Trivikram Srinivas proceeded with the shoot in Hyderabad. In the wake of shooting for a couple of days in Hyderabad at a private shopping center, the arranged timetable at Pollachi started from 12 February 2013. 

An activity grouping highlighting Kalyan and other cast individuals was shot in late February 2013. The following timetable started from 1 March 2013 at a uniquely raised set at Ramoji Film City in Hyderabad where scenes including Kalyan and the other cast individuals were shot. A couple of urgent scenes highlighting the lead on-screen characters were shot there toward the beginning of April 2013. Craftsmanship executive Ravindar regulated for the extraordinary set, which was worth 30 million. By mid-April 2013, a noteworthy bit of the film was shot there. Kalyan and the film's unit intended to leave for Spain to shoot vital groupings. 

Scenes highlighting the lead cast were shot toward the finish of April 2013 of every a railroad station set raised at Ramoji Film City. Another calendar started at Ramoji Film City from 2 May 2013. That plan finished on 28 May 2013. Samantha educated the media that the film's talking divides had been finished and that an abroad calendar was remaining. 

Recording at that point moved to Europe on 5 June 2013 for a long timetable in which three melodies, a couple of talking parcels and an activity grouping were wanted to be shot. Kalyan's presentation scene was shot in Switzerland which cost around 20 million. The presentation scene, which was likewise an activity succession, was shot on an island situated in Spain utilizing helicopters under the supervision of Peter Hein. After creation exercises were done all the while and naming for the film's first half was finished. The group came back from Milan on 2 July 2013. 

The tune "Its Time to Party", which fundamentally includes Kalyan, Samantha, Pranitha, Mumtaj and Hamsa Nandini was arranged by Ganesh and was shot in a bar set raised by Anand Sai at Annapurna 7 Acres Studios. Primary photography wrapped on 14 July 2013. 

"Attarintiki Daredi" centers around a young fellow's adventure endeavoring to persuade his granddad's repelled girl to rejoin the family. In its survey, Sify felt that the film's story was an inversion of "Nuvvu Naaku Nachav" (2001) and "Parugu" (2008). Kalyan's character, Gautham, is indicated viewing a couple of movies, where the hero is in camouflage endeavoring to prevail upon individuals who matter to him. In the film, Brahmanandam's character parodies the Ridley Scott film, "Fighter" (2000) named "Radiator" and wins the "Bascar" grants found without anyone else's input in the wake of being motivated from the Academy Awards. 

The legendary story of Indra alluring Ahalya subsequent to camouflaging as her better half Gautama and the revile cast by Gautama on them is mocked in the film with Brahmanandam assuming a key job. Two melodies were spoofed: one of them being a reverential tune "Kaatama Rayuda" composed by the writer Etla Ramadasa and made by Chittoor V. Nagaiah for the film "Sumangali" (1940), and the other a thing number "Kevvu Keka" composed by Sahithi and made by Devi Sri Prasad for the film "Gabbar Singh" (2012). A scene from the film, famously known as the "badam tree" scene, depended on a comparative scene from the 2012 English film "A Thousand Words". 

Devi Sri Prasad formed the soundtrack collection which comprises of 6 melodies. Sri Mani, Ramajogayya Sastry and Prasad himself composed the verses for the soundtrack collection, which was advertised by Aditya Music. The collection was discharged on 19 July 2013 of every a limited time occasion at the Shilpakala Vedika with the film's cast and group going to the occasion. The soundtrack collection got positive surveys from pundits. 

In late April 2013, "Attarintiki Daredi" was relied upon to discharge on 7 August 2013. It was then planned for a discharge on 9 August 2013 on the eve of India's Independence Day. Be that as it may, because of the then-continuous Telangana development, the discharge was put on hold. Later B. V. S. N. Prasad formally reported that the film would discharge on 9 October 2013 alongside "Ramayya Vasthavayya" (2013). In any case, the creators were compelled to reschedule the discharge date to 27 September 2013 following an hour and a half of the recording was spilled onto the web. On a normal, 80% of the film's tickets were sold out in all screens for the initial three days in Hyderabad. Aside from India, the film discharged in United States, United Kingdom, Germany, Canada and Dubai. 

The dramatic rights in the Nizam area were gained by Global Cinemas in late April 2013 at a then undisclosed record cost, which was uncovered later as 120 million toward the beginning of June 2013. My3 Movies reported on 26 April 2013 that they gained the abroad circulation and DVD privileges of the film. Y. Naveen, who financed a few abroad appropriation firms, obtained this present film's abroad rights for the benefit of My3 Movies for 70 million which, as indicated by Sify, was "a major bet". Hues Media obtained the conveyance rights in the United Kingdom from My3 Movies in late July 2013. Lorgan Entertainments gained the dramatic conveyance rights in Australia toward the beginning of August 2013. 

Sai Gopal, who helped Trivikram since "Swayamvaram" (1999), was accountable for the film's limited time exercises. The primary look blurb including Kalyan in a red shirt and dull freight pants was uncovered on 13 July 2013. The main look mystery of 23 seconds was discharged multi day later. Inside multi day of its discharge, the video posted by idlebrainlive on YouTube brought in excess of 190,000 hits and around 6,200 preferences. Starting at 16 July 2013, the mystery got more than 300,000 million hits and around 9,000 likes in this manner setting a record for any Telugu video transferred on YouTube around then. Before the finish of the following day, the secret was seen multiple times and got in excess of 6,000 remarks. 

The dramatic trailer was discharged on 19 July 2013 to positive audits. IANS wrote in its trailer audit, "High on business esteem, the smooth trailer of "Attarintiki Daaredhi" is a blend of activity, parody, sentiment and dramatization in proper extents. Trivikram hasn't settled on anything, including extraordinary climaxes for Pawan Kalyan, which he mouths in his mark style with a trace of mockery." "Oneindia Entertainment" composed ""Attarintiki Daredi" gives off an impression of being an outright performer with an adept slogan 'festivity of excitement'. It is additionally going to be high in excitement remainder as some prominent humorists Bramhanandam, Srinivas Reddy, Ali stimulate the interesting bones of the crowds". 

The video including Kalyan recording the tune "Kaatama Rayuda" was discharged on 4 August 2013. The video got positive reaction and as indicated by a report by "The Times of India", Pawan Kalyan's fans opined that the melody formed by Devi Sri Prasad helped them to remember the tune sung by Kalyan in the film "Thammudu" (1999). In late October 2013, the creators wanted to include two additional scenes as a limited time trick to debilitate copyright encroachment. Six minutes of film were added to the film this form was screened from 31 October 2013. 

The evening of 22 September 2013, an hour and a half bit of film was released on the web and ended up viral. B. V. S. N. Prasad documented a grumbling the next day against the copyright infringement, and looked for digital insurance for "Attarintiki Daredi". As a result of this occurrence, the film's discharge was deferred to 27 September 2013. The film's female lead, Samantha, just as different big names, for example, Siddharth, Harish Shankar, S. S. Rajamouli, Ram Gopal Varma and Nithiin, censured the unapproved dissemination act. In any case, police at first presumed that the occurrence may be an attention stunt established by individuals who put resources into the film. 

On being educated about the supposed clearance of the motion picture in various electronic organizations in the CD and versatile shops in Pedana town, Superintendent of Police J. Prabhakara Rao conveyed a unique group, driven by Pedana Rural Circle Inspector A. Pallapu Raju, to examine the issue. The police propelled a chase for unlicensed minimal circles in the CD shops over the area. Cds and hard plates from video parlors and shops leasing CDs in the Krishna locale were seized, and a portion of the shop proprietors were arrested for addressing. Pavan Kalyan fans went out into the boulevards, with signs containing trademarks dissenting the theft. Resulting to their examination, the police captured five individuals, notwithstanding generation partner Cheekati Arunkumar, and recuperated a few ill-conceived duplicates of the film on 20 September 2013. Arunkumar had filled in as a generation partner for the movies "Oosaravelli" (2011) and "Ongole Githa" (2013), the two of which were created by B. V. S. N. Prasad. 

Prabhakara Rao told the media that Arunkumar had given a duplicate of the DVD to his companion and Hyderabad-based APSP constable, Katta Ravi, who sent it to his companion, V. Sudheer Kumar, on 14 September 2013. Pedana-based videographer Poranki Suresh got the DVD from Sudheer Kumar, and later offered it to Kollipalli Anil Kumar, who claims the Devi Mobiles and Cell fix shop in Pedana. Anil Kumar had transferred the two-section motion picture into his framework, and sold the hour long section one of the film to his clients in various organizations. Anil Kumar erased the first record in his framework in the wake of finding out about the police attacks. Be that as it may, he admitted to the wrongdoing amid the examination. In view of the data given by Anil Kumar, a unique group driven by Machilipatnam DSP K.V. Srinivasa Rao, with the help of the Crime Investigation Department, Hyderabad, captured the suspects in Hyderabad. The police documented charges on 24 September 2013, against the five suspects under statements 63, 65 and 66 of the Copyright (Amendment Bill) 2010 and 429 IPC. 

Kalyan and Trivikram Srinivas chose to restore a huge part of their compensation to help Prasad conquer the budgetary emergency brought about by the hole. Samantha restored her whole pay to the makers. Kalyan stayed quiet amid the whole issue, however at last talked finally about the scene at the "Thank You Meet" of the film on 14 October 2013. He said this was an intrigue and not robbery. He included that he was very much aware of the actualities regarding who was behind the break of the film and won't extra anybody and will strike when everything looks good. 

The Television communicate rights were sold to an obscure station in mid June 2013 for a measure of 90 million which happened to be the most elevated sum that a TV slot paid for the broadcast privileges of a Telugu film till the clearance of privileges of "Aagadu" (2014) to Gemini TV in June 2014. The film's TV head was declared in mid December 2013 to be hung on 11 January 2014 in MAA TV. The film enlisted a TRP rating of 19.04 which was the most astounding for any Telugu film till date. The Indian DVD and Blu-beam were advertised by Volga Videos. The abroad DVD and Blu-beam were advertised by Bhavani Videos. 

"Attarinitki Daredi" got positive surveys from pundits as per "Universal Business Times India" who considered the film an "impeccable family performer" in their audit roundup. Sangeetha Devi Dundoo of "The Hindu" commended the film's peak scene, while additionally expressing that Trivikram Srinivas makes his essence felt before presuming that the film is, "A great portion of fun, custom-made for the movies." Ch. Sushil Rao of "The Times of India" evaluated the film 4 out of 5 and stated "The motion picture is a value watch. The reasons: Pawan Kalyan's satire, battles formed by Peter Hein, Trivikram Srinivas' composition abilities, Prasad Murella's cinematography, and Devi Sri Prasad's music. That there is guarantee in the motion picture is a vibe one gets directly from the opening scenes which are emotional". Sify evaluated the film 4 out of 5 and expressed "On the off chance that you are searching for sheer amusement, realize that Pawan Kalyan and Trivikram have blessing stuffed for you with high portion of parody. It is amusement, excitement and diversion. Pawan Kalyan's drama, his exhibitions and Trivikram's treatment of the basic story in powerful manner is the thing that makes "Attharintiki Daaredhi" a major performer". 

Shekhar of "Oneindia Entertainment" appraised the film 4 out of 5, calling it "an unquestionable requirement watch film for the enthusiasts of Pawan Kalyan and Trivikram." Jeevi of Idlebrain.com evaluated the film 4 out of 5 and adulated Trivikram Srinivas' content and included that Kalyan's execution and Trivikram Srinivas' narrating expertise "ensures that your heart is contacted on occasion and healthily snicker constantly while viewing the motion picture". IndiaGlitz appraised the film 4 out of 5 and commended Kalyan's execution in the film's peak, calling it "an inconspicuous edge" before conlcuding that the film "is a treat for the family gathering of people". 

Conversely, Sridhar Vivan of "Bangalore Mirror" appraised the film 2.5 out of 5 and censured the film's first half and felt that the "genuine excitement" started simply after the section of Brahmanandam's character. He also applauded Kalyan's execution and the movie's peak and Trivikram Srinivas' heading. Radhika Rajamani of Rediff.com evaluated the film 2.5 out of 5; she commended the exhibitions of the cast yet called "Attarintiki Daredi", "a snappy film which does not transcend being a normal family performer." IANS appraised the film 2.5 out of 5 and expressed "Sadly, Trivikram capitulates to star weight and produces an exceedingly disillusioning item. At almost three hours, the film influences you to flinch in your seats, particularly with the passionate punch it conveys in the peak". Sandeep Atreysa of "Deccan Chronicle" evaluated the film 1.5 out of 5 and felt that the film was made just for Kalyan's energetic fans and for other people, this film would have all the earmarks of being "high on style and low on substance". He called Kalyan's execution as the main "silver covering". 

The film gathered 335.2 million before the finish of its three-day first end of the week. Before the finish of its first week, the film gathered more than 490 million at the overall film industry. The film figured out how to perform well regardless of confronting rivalry from "Ramayya Vasthavayya" and gathered 603.4 million of every two weeks at the overall film industry. Exchange expert Taran Adarsh announced that till 13 October 2013, the film gathered 633.1 million at overall film industry. The film gathered 655 million out of 19 days at overall film industry. The film gathered 701.8 million out of 24 days at the overall film industry and turned into the second Telugu film to cross 700 million after "Magadheera" (2009). It gathered 712.4 million at the overall film industry before the finish of the fourth week. The film gathered 733.8 million at the overall film industry in 39 days. The film gathered 733.6 million at the overall film industry in about a month and a half. The film gathered 739 million at the overall film industry before the finish of its seventh end of the week. The film turned into the most noteworthy earning Telugu film ever outperforming "Magadheera". "Attarintiki Daredi" gathered an overall offer of 748.8 million and netted 1.87 billion in its lifetime. Be that as it may, after the four-day keep running of "" (2015) and"Srimanthudu"(2015), it turned into the third most noteworthy earning Telugu film ever. 

"Attarinitki Daredi" gathered 108.9 million on its first day at the Andhra Pradesh and Nizam areas breaking the past opening day record set by "Baadshah". As per Adarsh, the film gathered 107.2 million on its first day at the Andhra Pradesh and Nizam areas. He included that the film gathered the most noteworthy accumulations adding up to 32.8 million from Nizam locale pursued by Ceded district with 21.5 million, Guntur region with 14 million, East region with 10.4 million, Vishakhapatnam region with 8.2 million, West territory with 7.5 million, Krishna area with 7.1 million and Nellore region with 5.7 million. As per Adarsh, the film gathered 54.7 million at the Andhra Pradesh and Nizam districts. The film gathered 227.1 million at the Andhra Pradesh and Nizam districts, 30 million together in Tamil Nadu and Karnataka and 16.6 million in the remainder of India before the finish of its three-day first end of the week taking its overall aggregate to 335.2 million. The film gathered 37.3 million taking its four-day aggregate in the Andhra Pradesh and Nizam areas to 259.3 million, in this manner surpassing the main week sums of "Seethamma Vakitlo Sirimalle Chettu" and "Mirchi". 

Before the finish of its first week, the film gathered 350.5 million at the Andhra Pradesh and Nizam locales and 50 million from different states. The film earned 10.8 million in its first end of the week and 14.5 million in its first week with a net accumulation of 10.5 million and merchant offer of around 5 million at Tamil Nadu Box office consequently making a then unsurpassed record for a Telugu film in the state as indicated in terms of professional career investigator Sreedhar Pillai who felt that the film's accumulations had dropped because of the arrival of "Raja Rani" and "Idharkuthane Aasaipattai Balakumara" around the same time. The film earned 25 million in its first end of the week and 41.1 million nett in its first week at Karnataka and furthermore made an untouched record for a Telugu film. Adarsh detailed that the "Attarintiki Daredi" earned 15.8 million in Mumbai and Kerala. The accumulations dropped as aftereffect of dissents in Seemandhra over the bifurcation of the territory of Andhra Pradesh incorporating into key territories like Nizam and Ceded. Adarsh announced that till 13 October 2013, the film gathered 473.5 million at the Andhra Pradesh and Nizam locales. 

The film gathered more than 13 million on its nineteenth day making its aggregate in the Andhra Pradesh and Nizam districts cross the 500 million imprint. It remained in the third spot in the rundown of top 10 most elevated netting (share) Telugu films in the Andhra Pradesh and Nizam areas gone before by "Magadheera" and "Gabbar Singh". The film crossed the 200 million imprint in the Nizam locale and 90 million in the Ceded district in 20 days. The film gathered 9.5 million on its 24th day taking its aggregate in the Andhra Pradesh and Nizam districts to 546 million, along these lines prompting "Gabbar Singh" dropping to third place in the rundown of movies with the most elevated merchants' offer in Andhra Pradesh. "Gabbar Singh" had gathered 508.5 million in the Andhra Pradesh and Nizam districts in its lifetime. The film finished its 25-day keep running on 21 October 2013. The film gathered 550 million at the Andhra Pradesh and Nizam districts, 52.2 million at Karnataka and 15 million from the remainder of the nation before the finish of its fourth week. The film crossed 230 million in the Nizam locale in its fifth end of the week. The film gathered 577.3 million at the Andhra Pradesh and Nizam locales in 39 days. 

The film gathered 580.1 million at the Andhra Pradesh and Nizam areas in about a month and a half. The film finished a 50-day keep running in around 170 performance centers on 15 November 2013. The film finished a 100-day keep running in 32 theaters on 4 January 2014. On the 100th day of its showy run, "Attarintiki Daredi" was screened in four focuses in Nizam, eleven in Ceded, one in Vishakhapatnam, four each in Krishna and Guntur, six and two focuses in East and West Godavari individually. 

As indicated by Adarsh, the film gathered 26.7 million from paid reviews in the United States film industry. The film gathered more than $345,000 and netted more than different arrivals of 2013, "Baadshah" and "Seethamma Vakitlo Sirimalle Chettu", at the United States film industry. He expressed that the film gathered $429,000 from Thursday's review in the United States, in this way overwhelming the accumulations of paid sneak peaks of "Chennai Express" (2013) in the nation. Adarsh revealed that the film gathered $495,000 on Friday taking its two-day aggregate to $924,000 which was comparable to around 50 million. The film gathered 61.5 million in the initial three days at United States film industry. The film gathered 109.1 million in its first end of the week at the United States film industry. As indicated by Adarsh, the film was the third greatest opener in the United States in 2013 after "Chennai Express" and "Yeh Jawaani Hai Deewani" and was the main Indian film separated from the other two to include in the rundown of top 15 openers of 2013 in the nation. 

The film netted over $1.5 million inside three days surpassing the see accumulations of "Baadshah" in the United States and was relied upon to cross the $2 million imprint there. Before the finish of its fifth end of the week, the film gathered $2 million from the auditoriums included by the estimation and think-tank, Rentrak and $0.3 million from theaters excluded by Rentrak at the United States film industry taking the film's aggregate to 140 million. It gathered an all out 60 million from United Kingdom, Australia, New Zealand, Middle East locale, Canada, Singapore and others, taking its aggregate to 200 million, which made it the most elevated netting Telugu film abroad. 

The film was revamped into Kannada as "Ranna" in 2015 by Nanda Kishore. It was likewise revamped in Bengali as "Abhimaan" coordinated by Raj Chakraborty. Sundar C. coordinated the Tamil change "Vantha Rajavathaan Varuven" which was discharged in 2019.