Activity of 16 October 1799 

The Action of 16 October 1799 was a minor maritime commitment amid the French Revolutionary Wars between a squadron of British Royal Navy frigates and two frigates of the Spanish Navy near the Spanish maritime port of Vigo in Galicia. The Spanish boats were a fortune caravan, conveying silver specie and extravagance exchange products over the Atlantic Ocean from the settlements of New Spain to Spain. Located by British frigate HMS "Naiad" authorizing the barricade of Vigo late on the 15 October, the Spanish boats were in the last phases of their adventure. Diverting to escape from "Naiad", the Spanish before long wound up encompassed as increasingly British frigates shut in. 

Despite the fact that they isolated their boats with an end goal to part their adversaries, the Spanish skippers were unfit to get away: "Thetis" was caught after a short commitment with HMS "Ethalion" on the morning of 16 October, while "Santa Clause Brigida" nearly achieved security, just being gotten on the morning of 17 October in the ways to deal with the protected harbor at Muros. After a short commitment in the midst of the stones she was likewise caught by a mind-boggling British power. Both caught ships were taken to Britain, where their joined cargoes were transported with incredible exhibit to the Bank of England. The possible estimation of their freight was evaluated as at any rate Âł618,040, bringing about one of the biggest pulls of prize cash at any point granted. 

In 1796, after the mystery terms of the Treaty of San Ildefonso, the Kingdom of Spain all of a sudden switched its situation in the French Revolutionary Wars abandoning a foe of the French Republic into a partner. The Spanish affirmation of war on Great Britain constrained the British Mediterranean Fleet to relinquish the Mediterranean Sea totally, withdrawing to ports at Gibraltar and Lisbon. This power currently focused against the Spanish Navy, the greater part of which was positioned at the principle armada base of Căądiz in Southern Spain. A British barricade armada prevailed upon a critical triumph the Spanish at the Battle of Cape St Vincent in February 1797, preventing the Spanish armada from assuming a noteworthy job in the continuous war. 

Other Spanish ports were additionally barred with the expectation of constraining Spanish exchange and development and catching fortune guards from the provinces of New Spain and South America. Huge amounts of gold, silver and significant exchange merchandise crossed the Atlantic in customary furnished frigate caravans. To block and catch these shipments the Royal Navy dispatched their own frigates to watch the Spanish coast. To energize their mariners, the Royal Navy disseminated prize cash to the estimation of the boats and material caught and the seizure of a Spanish fortune armada could yield awesome measures of cash: especially extensive totals had been caught amid past wars in 1656, 1744 and 1762, yet amid the initial three years of contention between Great Britain and Spain just a single fortune escort had been captured, close Căądiz at the Action of 26 April 1797, and on that event the fortune was pirated aground before the guard was seized. 

On 21 August 1799, a caravan of two 34-firearm frigates, "Thetis" under Captain Don Juan de Mendoza and "Santa Clause Brigida" under Captain Don Antonio Pillon, cruised from Vera Cruz in New Spain with a load that included cochineal, indigo color, cocoa and sugar however which essentially comprised of in excess of two million silver Spanish dollars. The entry over the Atlantic was uneventful and by the evening of 15 October the escort, compelled to make any Spanish port, was nearing its goal at Vigo, a strengthened port city in Galicia only south of Cape Finisterre at the most northwestern purpose of Spain. The ports of Northern Spain were barred by British frigates cruising autonomously, crossing the methodologies looking for foe transportation and it was one such ship, the 38-weapon HMS "Naiad" under Captain William Pierrepont, that located the Spanish escort in position at 20:00 on 15 October. Dismissing toward the southeast, the Spanish ships at that point made all sail upper east looking for a protected harbor, with Pierrepont in interest. 

At 03:30 on 16 October, another sail was spotted toward the southwest, quickly uncovered to be a second British frigate, the 38-firearm HMS "Ethalion" under Captain James Young. "Ethalion" joined the pursuit and at first light two additional sails were located, the 32-weapon HMS "Alcmene" under Captain Henry Digby toward the west and 32-firearm HMS "Triton" under Captain John Gore toward the north. With four British frigates presently in full interest, the Spanish skippers looked to part their foe and separated, at which Pierrepont coordinated "Ethalion", the nearest British ship, to seek after the quicker "Thetis". Youthful went along, shooting long-go shot in "Santa Clause Brigida"<nowiki>'</nowiki>s course at 09:00, driving Pillon's ship further from his friend. 

As "Naiad", "Triton" and "Alcmene" gushed past in quest for "Santa Clause Brigida", Young concentrated on "Thetis", going inside range at 11:30. Mendoza, seeing that fight was inescapable, endured crosswise over "Ethalion"<nowiki>'</nowiki>s retires from exertion to rake Young's ship. Youthful turned so as to ruin the move and terminated two fast broadsides into "Thetis", which reacted in kind. For an hour the frigates traded running flame until Mendoza, acknowledging escape was inconceivable, surrendered. "Thetis" had lost one man executed and nine injured in the trade while "Ethalion" had endured no losses. 

As "Ethalion" stifled "Thetis" the rest of the British squadron proceeded with southwards in quest for "Santa Clause Brigida". Pillon was an accomplished officer with a decent learning of the Northern Spanish coast and he planned to lose his followers in the rough channels of Cape Finisterre. At an early stage 17 October he achieved Spanish waterfront waters, adjusting Finisterre just past the Monte Lora rocks. Chief Gore on "Triton", which was in full stream at seven bunches, was uninformed of the impediment and at 05:00 collided with them, going to a juddering end and causing serious harm to his ship's structure. Butchery was capable anyway to bring "Triton" off soon a short time later and proceeded with interest, helped by Digby on "Alcmene" who had the capacity to obstruct Pillon's course into Porte de Vidre. The two frigates opened flame on "Santa Clause Brigida" at 07:00 as the Spanish ship looked for haven in the stones at Commarurto near the protected harbor at Muros, Pillon's development hampered by the beach front "rias" that hindered the breeze. Following an hour of opposition, with "Naiad" belatedly drawing nearer, Pillon was compelled to surrender his ship to unrivaled British powers. "Santa Clause Brigida" had lost two men slaughtered and eight injured, "Alcmene" one executed and nine injured and "Triton" a solitary man injured. 

As the British power assumed responsibility for "Santa Clause Brigida", a Spanish squadron of four boats cruised from Vigo with the presence of planning to convey Pierrepont's squadron to fight. Pierrepont quickly issued orders for his boats to meet with the Spanish who instantly turned about and came back to port without going in close vicinity to run. A shore breeze empowered the British boats and their prize to remove themselves from the Commarurto rocks moving along without any more harm. They at that point cruised legitimately for the armada base at Plymouth, touching base on 22 October to find that "Thetis" and "Ethalion" had achieved the port the day preceding. Dispatches were sent to Lord Bridport, officer of the Channel Fleet, which were then sent to the Admiralty and uncovered the size of the prize. 

On board "Thetis" was discovered an amount of exchange cocoa and a progression of boxes containing coin, including 333 boxes of 3,000 dollars every, four boxes of 2,385 dollars each, 94 boxes containing 4,000 dollars each and two brilliant doubloons and 90 brilliant half-doubloons. This totalled 1,385,292 silver dollars, with a sterling estimation of Âł311,690. On "Santa Clause Brigida" were exchange cocoa, sugar, indigo and cochineal worth altogether about Âł5,000 just as 446 boxes containing 3,000 dollars each, 59 packs and three barrels of dollars and various free coins, for a complete estimation of no less than 1,338,000 silver dollars or Âł301,350. Through and through the sterling estimation of the freight was determined as at the very least Âł618,040 (the likeness Âł in 2019). The caught ships anyway were discounted as useless, albeit some extra cash was made unloading their maritime stores. In the repercussions, the mariners of the squadron were noted in the roads of Portsmouth wearing "monetary orders stuck in their caps, purchasing looks for the enjoyment of browning them, and issuing laws that any of their group who showed up without a gold-bound cap ought to be cobbed, so the unfortunate man who showed up in silver could just escape by speaking to that the costlier articles were altogether purchased up, however he had constrained the businessperson to take cash for gold ribbon." 

This immense total of cash was transported through Plymouth on 63 wagons, monitored by furnished mariners and Royal Marines and joined by melodic groups and cheering groups to the security of the Royal Citadel. It stayed in Plymouth until November when it was expelled to London with significant function and set at the Bank of England. The entireties granted as prize cash, conveyed in equivalent banished shares among the teams of "Ethalion", "Naiad", "Alcmene" and "Triton" were among the biggest at any point recorded. Each skipper was given Âł40,730 (of which a third was because of the chief naval officer in order), every lieutenant Âł5,091, each warrant officer Âł2,468, every sailor Âł791 and every mariner or marine Âł182. For the normal sailors, this complete was multiple times their yearly pay of Âł12. As history specialist James Henderson noted "even the humblest sailor could set himself up with a comfortable bar". For the chiefs, regularly paid Âł150 every year, this was more cash than they could make in 270 years. On the main resulting event when a Spanish fortune armada was effectively blocked, at the Battle of Cape Santa Maria in October 1804, a much more noteworthy pull was caught. On that event anyway the Admiralty utilized a dark guideline to catch the majority of the prize and the chiefs just got around Âł15,000 each. 

Antiquarian Richard Woodman has noticed that this activity shows both the strength of the Royal Navy and its exclusive requirements at this phase in the war, expressing that "The circumstantial appearance of four frigates in the immense Atlantic vouches for the colossal assets the British put into the indictment of the war. That the four frigate chiefs continued to act in such immaculate show is additional proof, on the off chance that it were required, of the common guidelines of shared help and help".