Vandalism (The Office) 

"Vandalism" is the fourteenth scene of the ninth period of the American parody TV arrangement "The Office" and the 190th scene generally. The scene was composed by Owen Ellickson. It was coordinated by Lee Kirk, who is arrangement star Jenna Fischer's better half. It initially publicized on NBC on January 31, 2013. The scene visitor stars Chris Diamantopoulos as Brian the blast mike administrator, Mark Proksch as Nate, Brad William Henke as Frank, and Ameenah Kaplan as Val. 

The series—presented as though it were a genuine documentary—depicts the regular day to day existences of office workers in the Scranton, Pennsylvania, part of the anecdotal Dunder Mifflin Paper Company. In this scene, somebody vandalizes Pam Halpert's stockroom wall painting. Troubled, she enrolls Dwight Schrute (Rainn Wilson) and Nellie Bertram (Catherine Tate) to enable her track to down the vandal. In the mean time, in their Philadelphia loft, Darryl Philbin (Craig Robinson) is awkward with Jim Halpert's (John Krasinski) uncleanliness. Angela Lipton (Angela Kinsey) hesitantly permits Oscar Martinez (Oscar Nunez) and Kevin Malone (Brian Baumgartner) to go to her child Phillip's first birthday celebration party. 

The scene got blended surveys from TV commentators; many felt that the subplot including Brian (Diamantopoulos) being pulled in to Pam was shoehorned into the arrangement and served little capacity other than to make unnecessary show. The scene was seen by 3.97 million watchers and got a 1.9/5 percent rating among grown-ups between the ages of 18 and 49. Despite the fact that the scene positioned first in its half-hour timeslot, it tied with the arrangement finale of "30 Rock" to be the second most elevated appraised NBC arrangement of the night. 

Somebody paints butts on Pam Halpert's (Jenna Fischer) stockroom wall painting. Troubled, she requests to know the vandal's personality, yet the distribution center laborers stay quiet to ensure their associate. She at that point takes a stab at speaking to the feelings of the other office specialists, however with her better half Jim Halpert (John Krasinski) off in Philadelphia, just Dwight Schrute (Rainn Wilson) and Nellie Bertram (Catherine Tate) demonstrate any intrigue. The three bait stockroom specialist Nate (Mark Proksch) upstairs and investigate him in confinement; Nate before long breaks and distinguishes Frank (Brad William Henke) as the vandal. They take the issue to HR, and Toby Flenderson (Paul Lieberstein) holds a gathering between the included gatherings. Pam, apparently at Toby's proposal, apologizes for having potentially encroached on Frank's space by utilizing the distribution center to paint her wall painting, yet Frank accordingly affronts Pam and her painting utilizing disgusting language and demands that his illustration of butts was interesting. Toby and Nelly both agree with Frank's stance, so Pam and Dwight bring things into their very own hands by painting a peculiar naked man on Frank's truck with launderable paint. As Pam tells the narrative team that she feels it is proper that she utilized her specialty to establish her vengeance for the vandalism, Frank shows up shouting in outrage and jumps at Pam. Brian (Chris Diamantopoulos), the group's blast mic administrator, intercedes by hitting Frank over the face with his mic. Straightforward and Brian are in this manner terminated by their particular managers. As Brian leaves, he discloses to Pam that he will dependably be there for her in the event that she needs somebody. 

In the mean time, in their Philadelphia condo, Darryl Philbin (Craig Robinson) and Jim locate their living styles are progressively conflicting. Jim is sloppy, leaving messy dishes to absorb the sink until another person washes them, while Darryl is so meticulous about his assets that he puts marks with his name on every one of them, even a pack of flour. At the point when Darryl disagrees with Jim utilizing his marked espresso cup, the two start squabbling. In the end the two come to see each other's propensities better, and calm strain by playing a computer game together. 

(Angela Kinsey) and Robert Lipton (Jack Coleman) are praising their child Phillip's first birthday celebration with a get-together of well off political partners. Angela is stunned to discover that Robert welcomed his darling Oscar Martinez (Oscar Nunez) to the gathering after she revealed to Robert she didn't need him there. Angela welcomes Dwight (her very own extramarital sweetheart) in countering, yet he despises the welcome. Kevin Malone (Brian Baumgartner) knows about this and excitedly volunteers to go in Dwight's place. Oscar, who trusts he was welcomed on the grounds that Robert is infatuated with him, is harmed when he discovers that he was welcome to help Robert's assessment in the surveys among Latino voters. Amid the taking of a gathering photograph, Robert has Oscar remain in a spot where he totally close off Angela, and Oscar and Angela start to squabble with one another. After the gathering, Robert censures them for their conduct and scolds them to improve later on. In any case, Kevin hinders to reveal to Robert that he is a horrendous individual for treating Angela and Oscar carefully as a way to increase political help. 

"Vandalism" was composed by overseeing maker Owen Ellickson, making it his third composition credit for the arrangement. It was coordinated by Lee Kirk. This denotes his first directorial passage for the arrangement, in spite of the fact that he had beforehand visitor featured as the minor character Clark in the 6th season scene "The Delivery". Kirk is additionally Fischer's significant other. The scene visitor stars Diamantopoulos as Brian the blast mike administrator, his third appearance after the former two scenes. Proksch returns as Nate, as does Kaplan as Val. This is the primary scene to highlight Henke as Frank. Daniels had prodded in a meeting that one character would be terminated from the show "in Episode 15". In spite of the fact that "Vandalism" was the fourteenth scene publicized, it was really the fifteenth created, in view of generation numbers. 

"Vandalism" initially circulated just after "Junior Salesman" on NBC on January 31, 2013. In its unique American communicate, the scene was seen by 3.97 million watchers, making it the second scene in the arrangement, after the prior ninth season passage "The Target", to plunge beneath the 4 million edge. It got a 1.9 rating/5 percent offer among grown-ups between the ages of 18 and 49. This implies it was seen by 1.9 percent of every one of the 18-to 49-year-olds, and 5 percent of each of the 18-to 49-year-olds staring at the TV at the season of the communicate. "The Office" positioned first in its half hour timeslot, and tied with the arrangement finale of "30 Rock" to be the second most elevated evaluated NBC arrangement of the night, in spite of the fact that "30 Rock" gathered more watchers. Both the finale of "30 Rock" and "Vandalism" were beaten by "Junior Salesman". 

Michael Tedder of "Vulture" granted the episode—along with "Junior Salesman"—four stars out of five. He making the most of Kevin's berating the Senator for his poor treatment of his loved ones, and said "that it accompanied Kevin's ending conveyance simply improved it." However, he was condemning of the Brian subplot, calling it "the least fascinating way this camera team uncover could have gone". Roth Cornet of IGN granted the scene a 7 out of 10, indicating a "decent" scene. In spite of taking note of that the show itself was still great in contrast with quite a bit of TV, Cornet composed that the scene is a case of the "threat of unnecessarily hauling things out, as we have seen the misuse of completion things before they have had the chance to achieve their maximum capacity previously." Cornet adulated Kevin's "truth bomb", composing that it "worked flawlessly", however she called "the 'man behind the blind' uncover ... a severe frustration" and a "cop-out" to connect with the gathering of people. 

Brett Davinger of "The California Literary Review" called Brian's tricks "dreadful", and thought about whether the character would start to copy the qualities of the eighth season character Cathy, who endeavored to cheat with Jim. He called the Jim and Darryl story filler, however was progressively positive about Oscar and Kevin's story, taking note of that the closure was "a short section, yet all around done". Bonnie Stiernberg of "Glue" magazine composed that the possibility of Brian incidentally isolating Pam and Jim prompted "one of the more out-of-the-case scenes" of the arrangement. In any case, she felt that the journalists ought to have "thought of [the idea] at some point last season" and that the idea appeared to be constrained. Stiernberg paralleled the snappy development to Pam and Brian's relationship horribly to the moderate development of Pam and Jim's underlying appreciation for one another. Scratch Campbell of TV.com composed that "Vandalism"—along with "Junior Salesman"—was "such a great amount of more honed than a week ago's preliminary in Dullsville". He felt that the scene was "imperative", since it proceeded with the plot including Brian. Campbell at first was not satisfied with the advancement, however said that the plot will be "a definitive trial of the show's sentimental hypothesis" that "the quiet men (the working class) continually and honorably overturning the set up and careless men (the bourgeoisie) in the lives of "The Office"s womenfolk". 

Erik Adams of "The A.V. Club" granted the scene a "C−" and to a great extent censured the presentation of Brian as a potential love enthusiasm for Pam. He was particularly reproachful of the battle scene, saying Brian acting the hero was a superfluous contraption, and that having Dwight in the job of Pam's safeguard would have been an all the more fitting goals to the subplot. Adams, be that as it may, was complimentary towards Kevin's part in the scene, and considered it a glimmer "generally period "Office" taking care of business". Casey Gillis of "The News and Advance" said the general accomplishment of the ninth period of "The Office" was harmed by "Vandalism", just as "Junior Salesman". She composed that, while the scene "would have been charming independent from anyone else," after Brian guarded Pam "the show cruised directly over that shark".