Mallory Hagan 

Mallory Hytes Hagan (conceived December 23, 1988) is an American lawmaker and previous belle of the ball who won Miss America 2013 as Miss New York 2012. She moved to New York in 2008 after her first year of school at Auburn University. Preceding winning Miss America, Hagan was additionally Miss Brooklyn 2010, Miss Manhattan 2011, Miss New York City 2012 and a two-time Miss New York first sprinter up. When living in Alabama, Hagan had been sprinter up in the Miss Alabama's Outstanding Teen program. As Miss Chattahoochee Valley 2007, was a non-finalist ability champ at Miss Alabama. She won the Miss America rivalry on a stage of youngster sexual maltreatment mindfulness and avoidance because of her family ancestry's pregnant maltreatment. She likewise gave a reaction on the issue of firearm control in which she restricted battling brutality with savagery. 

She kept running in the 2018 congressional race as a Democrat in Alabama's third congressional region, which contains 14 districts and incorporates the place where she grew up of Opelika, Alabama. 

Hagan was conceived in Memphis, Tennessee and was brought up in Opelika, Alabama. Hagan is a 2007 alumni of Opelika High School. Her folks were brought up in Auburn, Alabama. She was impacted by her developmental years went through with a mother who ran a move studio in the Auburn-Opelika region, where she was raised. Her grandma additionally ran a move studio in Tennessee, where Hagan was conceived. She is a previous understudy at Auburn University, where she went through a year concentrating biomedical science. She was an individual from the sorority Pi Beta Phi Alabama Gamma part, turning into the fourth Pi Beta Phi to move toward becoming Miss America (Marilyn Van Derbur, Jackie Mayer, and Susan Akin). 

She moved to Brooklyn in October 2008. At the season of her entry, she had under $1000 and no activity. A few sources expressed that Hagan was a Park Slope occupant when she won Miss America. "The Wall Street Journal" ran a revision, supported by "The New York Times", that she was an occupant of Windsor Terrace, Brooklyn at the time. Hagan had lived in six diverse Brooklyn neighborhoods between her landing in 2008 and her Miss America triumph in 2013, including Sunset Park and Williamsburg. 

At the season of the 2013 Miss America rivalry, she was a Fashion Institute of Technology (FIT) understudy, where she considered promoting, showcasing and interchanges with yearnings of a calling identified with corrective and aroma advertising. At FIT, she was a piece of the Presidential Honors Program. Her three situations in the Miss New York rivalry gave her adequate grant monies to pay for her whole FIT educational cost. She prepared a few distinctive physical and mental techniques to get ready for the show. Her wellness mentors included Richard Talens of social wellness organize Fitocracy, Sohee Lee, and Mark Fisher of Mark Fisher Fitness. One of her preparation components was the CrossFit practice program. 

Preceding moving to New York, Hagan earned sprinter up positions in the Miss Alabama's Outstanding Teen and the Miss Alabama rivalry. She contended in the Miss Alabama's Outstanding Teen event from the ages of 13 to 17. Hagan has expressed that in the Miss Alabama 2008 challenge, which was her solitary endeavor at that title, she won a non-finalist ability grant. 

Hagan was the primary sprinter up in both of the Miss New York 2010 and Miss New York 2011 events. 

She at that point proceeded to win the title of Miss New York 2012. Amid Hagan's rule as Miss New York 2012, her stage was kid sexual maltreatment mindfulness and aversion. 

Her challenge bio expressed that "Hagan has regarded the ladies in her family who have been casualties of sexual maltreatment by sharing their own accounts and urging others to stand firm." According to explanations made amid an Associated Press talk with, her mom, Mandy Moore, persuaded her to handle kid sexual maltreatment since it had influenced her mom, auntie, grandma, and cousins. Hagan has expressed that she has encountered the expansive influences of youngster sexual maltreatment. 

The 2013 challenge was Hagan's last year of Miss America Organization qualification. 

Her initial jest to the Miss America 2013 group of onlookers toward the start of the on-air communicate was "Sandy may have cleared away our shores yet never our soul." During the challenge, she played out a tap move routine to James Brown's "Get Up Offa That Thing" while at the same time wearing a two-piece outfit. Different components of her triumphant closet incorporated a dark string two-piece and an uneven white night outfit by Juan Carloa Pinera. 

Hagan was delegated Miss America 2013 on January 12, 2013 in Las Vegas, Nevada by active Miss America 2012, Laura Kaeppeler, pummeling out first sprinter, Miss South Carolina 2012, Ali Rogers. At the season of her Miss America triumph, Hagan was 24 years of age and an inhabitant of Brooklyn. Alongside the title of Miss America, Hagan likewise won a $50,000 grant. 

Because of the choice to move the expo back to Atlantic City, New Jersey, her rule was stopped by four months and finished on September 15, 2013. Despite the fact that Hagan pursues a couple of different Miss New York challengers to gain the Miss America crown, she is the first Brooklynite to win. 

Hagan was the fourth Miss New York, second New York City inhabitant, and first Brooklyn occupant to fill in as Miss America. 

Hagan advanced attention to kid sexual maltreatment, and in her initial 24 hours as Miss America, she was in correspondence with United States Secretary of Education, Arne Duncan. Her first activity as Miss America was to progressed toward becoming representative for the IHOP's eighth Annual National Pancake Day Celebration in which they would like to raise $3 Million for the Children's Miracle Network Hospitals. As Miss America, Hagan professed to travel every month. Amid her year, she campaigned with the National Children's Alliance to reestablish subsidizing in the 2014 spending plan for Child Advocacy Centers crosswise over America. Furthermore, she worked with the International Center for Missing and Exploited Children, Safe Horizon, Stop it Now, and Prevent Child Abuse America. She was ridiculed in the press for putting on weight a couple of months in the wake of getting to be Miss America. 

In December 2017, the Huffington Post uncovered that the expo CEO Sam Haskell had a progression of messages corrupting previous Miss Americas, including Hagan. Hagan took to the media requesting Haskell and different individuals from the Miss America Board of Directors, including Tammy Haddad of Haddad Media and Miss America Phyllis George, leave. Hagan held a Facebook live expressing "I am the tempest" in reference to the pioneers, for example, Haskell, trusting that the "media storm" would blow over. She started a T-shirt line that currently benefits the Miss America Organization. 

In January 2018, Hagan made a Change.org appeal to request the acquiescence of Haskell nearby the other previous Miss Americas and at last named Gretchen Carlson the new Executive Chair of the Board of Directors, setting up new initiative for the national non-benefit. 

Hagan utilized her grant cash to finish her training at the Fashion Institute of Technology (FIT), where she earned a degree in Advertising, Marketing and Communications. 

After her rule as Miss America, Hagan moved her enthusiasm from promoting to TV facilitating and moved to Los Angeles to seek after a TV profession. She later came back to New York City and began an individual marking business called "Characterize: Mind. Mission. Promoting." with Claire Buffie, Miss New York 2010. 

Hagan filled in as a nightly anchorperson WLTZ-TV in Columbus, Georgia before her congressional run. 

Hagan kept running in the 2018 congressional decision as a Democrat in Alabama's third congressional locale. Hagan was embraced by the Alabama New South Alliance, the Retail, Wholesale and Department Store Union, End Citizens United, Lilly Ledbetter, and got a "Firearm Sense Candidate" refinement from Moms Demand Action. In the principal quarter, Hagan raised over $100k for her congressional race. 

Her battle was eventually fruitless. She was vanquished in the decision by officeholder Mike Rogers.