Wir danken dir, Gott, wir danken dir, BWV 29 

Bach utilized the music from the choral development for both the and of his Mass in B minor. 

Bach created the cantata in 1731 for , the initiation of the new town gathering, which was commended yearly in a happy administration in the on the Monday following the gala day of St. Bartholomew . It was anything but a popularity based race, yet a "stately exchange of office" of committee individuals who were selected. The administration was not part of the formal year with cantata writings identified with endorsed scriptural epistle and gospel readings. For a similar event, Bach had effectively composed the cantata , in his first year in Leipzig, 1723. For the Ratswechsel administration, he could rely on the whole gathering (his manager) tuning in, most likely likewise government employees and delegates of the Elector's organization for the locale. The musicologist Klaus Hofmann notes: "It was an open door for Bach to indicate how sacrosanct music was prospering under his heading and to introduce himself as an author." 

The cantata content of "Wir danken dir, Gott" by an obscure creator incorporates into development 2 the principal section of Psalm 75 () and as the end chorale the fifth stanza of Johann Gramann's song of acclaim "" (1540). 

Bach previously played out the cantata on 27 August 1731. In 1733, he adjusted the music of the main choral development with just minor changes for the of his Missa (Kyrie and Gloria) for the Dresden court, on a content communicating a similar thought in Latin. As indicated by Hofmann, the development depends on a prior lost piece. 

Bach played out the cantata for Ratswechsel no less than two additional occasions, on 31 August 1739 and on 24 August 1749. He extended the Missa of 1733 to his Mass in B minor and finished up his work by rehashing the music as the . 

The cantata is organized in eight developments and takes around 28 minutes to perform. The instrumentation mirrors the happy event for which it was composed. Bach scored the work for four vocal soloists (soprano (S), alto (A), tenor (T) and bass) (B), a four-section choir, and a Baroque ensemble of three trumpets (Tr), timpani (Ti), two oboes (Ob), two violins (Vl) (violin solo in development 3), violas (Va), an obbligato organ (Org) and basso continuo (Bc). The signature score is titled: "Bey der Rahts-Wahl/1731. /Wir dancken dir, Gott, wir dancken dir. /à/4 Voci. /3 Trombe/Tamburi/2 Hautbois/2 Violini/Viola/e/Continuo/con Organo obligato/di/Joh.Seb:Bach. 

In the accompanying table of the developments, the scoring pursues the Neue Bach-Ausgabe, and the shortened forms for voices and instruments the rundown of Bach cantatas. The time mark is given utilizing the image to regular time (4/4). The timpani are recorded with the trumpets since they generally play together. 

The cantata is one of couple of consecrated Bach cantatas opened by an instrumental sinfonia. Another is the early . The music is a game plan of the prelude from Bach's "Partita" for violin, BWV 1006, which Bach had officially updated for organ and strings in 1729 for the wedding cantata . In the cantata for Ratswechsel, the performance organ has the first violin impact "in virtuoso motoric composing", while the full symphony includes a backup. 

The primary vocal development is a setting of stanza 1 of Psalm 75, "", deciphered in the King James rendition of the book of scriptures as "Unto thee, O God, do we offer gratitude, unto thee do we express gratefulness: for that thy name is close thy wondrous works pronounce". As opposed to the virtuoso presentation, the tune starts in motet style in grave stile antico. The bass starts in incredible straightforwardness a topic in even advances; the tenor begins impersonating very quickly, the alto somewhat later, at that point the soprano. A countersubject delineates the recounting God's miracles, adorning the words ("proclaim") and ("wondrous works"). In the first place just oboes and strings play with the voices, at that point a trumpet duplicates the soprano. Growing further, two trumpets participate in the polyphony, and a peak is achieved when the third trumpet and timpani enter. Hofmann remarks that in spite of the fact that the development starts in old style, "Bach’s technique for strengthening (by methods for which he bit by bit presents trumpets and at last enables the subject to be heard in stretta) is completely elaborate. 

"" (Alleluia, quality and power) is set as an aria for tenor. The voice, a performance violin and the continuo are equivalent accomplices. 

A recitative for bass, "" (Praise God! It is well for us!) specifies that God "holds his hand defensively and in gift over the city". 

The soprano aria is a supplication, "" (Consider us with Your love)‘’ (‘Think of us with your love’) for "God’s future fortune", depicted by Hofmann as "a melodic showcase piece loaded with warmth and delicacy in a shaking siciliano musicality. For significant lots in the vocal areas, Bach manages without a continuo backup (accordingly without the instrumental bass register) – a strategy that successfully adds to making a sonic impression of delicacy and appeal". 

A recitative for alto is a petition for future assurance, "" (Do not overlook later, with Your hand), finished up by a choral "So be it" as one. The shock is an understanding of a line cited from , "und alles Volk soll sagen: Amen!" (And every one of the general population will reply and state, Amen.). 

The alto plays out the last aria, "" (Hallelujah, control and might)‘’, rehashing and strengthening the musings of the first. The music rehashes the fundamental area of the tenor aria, presently joined by the organ. This nearby association inside the structure of crafted by both the subject (3 and 6) and the instrument (1 and 6) is unordinary in Bach's cantatas. 

In the end chorale, "" (Glory, and applause with respect) the trumpets complement the finishes of certain lines of the fifth section of Johann Gramann's "". 

The passages of the accompanying table are taken from the Bach Cantatas Website. 

Scores 

Books 

Online sources 

A few databases give extra data on every cantata, for example, history, scoring, hotspots for content and music, interpretations to different dialects, discography, talk and melodic examination. 

The total chronicles of Bach's cantatas are joined by liner notes from performers and musicologists: Klaus Hofmann composed for Masaaki Suzuki, and Christoph Wolff for Ton Koopman.