Two Complete Science-Adventure Books 

Two Complete Science-Adventure Books was an American mash sci-fi magazine, distributed by Fiction House, which went on for eleven issues somewhere in the range of 1950 and 1954 as a friend to "Planet Stories". Each issue conveyed two books or long novellas. It was at first planned to convey just reprints, yet before long started to distribute unique stories. Givers included Isaac Asimov, Robert A. Heinlein, Arthur C. Clarke, Poul Anderson, John Brunner, and James Blish. The magazine collapsed in 1954, nearly toward the finish of the mash period. 

The mid 1950s saw emotional changes in the historical backdrop of U.S. sci-fi distributing. Toward the beginning of 1949, everything except one of the significant magazines in the field were in mash design; before the finish of 1955, practically all had either stopped distribution or changed to process group. In spite of the fast decrease of the mash advertise, a few new sci-fi magazines were propelled in mash position amid these years. "Planet Stories", a mash sf magazine that concentrated on interplanetary experience, was adequately fruitful to change from quarterly to every other month in late 1950. The distributer, Fiction House, likewise chose to dispatch a buddy magazine, pointed all the more explicitly at the developing readership for wallets. This was "Two Complete Science-Adventure Books"; the main issue was dated Winter 1950, and it seemed three times each year on a normal timetable. Malcolm Reiss, who administered a few of Fiction House's magazines and funnies, was editorially included with the "Two Complete Science-Adventure Stories" for a mind-blowing duration, however for the initial three issues Jerome Bixby, who around then was altering "Planet Stories", took on the new magazine also. Bixby left in 1951 to work for Standard Publications. After this, Reiss was left in sole control until 1953, when Katherine Daffron was delegated editorial manager. Daffron altered the magazine for the last two issues. Fiction House attempted another sidekick magazine that year, "Best in Science Fiction", yet it went on for just two issues. "Two Complete Science-Adventures Books" outlived "Beat in Science Fiction" by just a couple of months; it was dropped in 1954, in the midst of the breakdown of the general mash showcase. The last issue was dated Spring 1954, and "Planet Stories" itself just went on until the next year. 

"Two Complete Science-Adventure Books" regularly conveyed around 80,000 words, which was discernibly more than the greater part of its rivals, which for the most part kept running from 45,000 to 75,000 words. Fiction House paid $300 or more for the first books it printed. 

The magazine was initially proposed to be a vehicle for republishing books. The title and organization were a reverberation of "Two Complete Detective Books Magazine", which had been distributed, likewise by Fiction House, during the 1930s. The primary issue included Isaac Asimov's "Stone in the Sky", and L. Ron Hubbard's "The Kingslayer". Both of these were reprints: "Rock in the Sky" had been distributed by Doubleday before in the year, and "The Kingslayer" had showed up in Hubbard's short story gathering "The Kingslayer", distributed by Fantasy Publishing Company, Inc., in 1949. Ensuing issues surrendered the strategy of reproducing two books, and for some time each issue included one unique story and one republish. In some later issues the two stories were unique. 

In spite of the fact that the creators included names, for example, James Blish and Poul Anderson, a significant part of the material was, in the expressions of sf history specialist Joseph Marchesani, "subordinate space musical drama", specific the first books. The first stories that showed up in the magazine included "The Wanton of Argus", an early story by John Brunner; "Searcher of the Sphinx", by Arthur C. Clarke; "Sword of Xota" and "Sargasso of Lost Cities", both by James Blish; and "The Tritonian Ring", by L. Sprague de Camp. Reprints included "The Time Machine" by H.G. Wells; "Past This Horizon", by Robert A. Heinlein (under the nom de plume MacDonald); and "The Humanoids" by Jack Williamson. 

Bixby incorporated a section for perusers' letters in the issues he altered, however Reiss and Daffron did not, and none of the three composed articles. 

The accompanying table shows which books showed up in which issues. 

"Two Complete Science-Adventure Books" was altered fundamentally by Jerome Bixby for the initial three issues, at that point by Malcolm Reiss for six issues, and after that essentially by Katherine Daffron for the last two issues. Reiss was included with altering the magazine all through its run. 

The timetable was totally ordinary, with issues dated Spring, Summer, and Winter of every year. The magazine was in mash position all through; each issue was estimated at 25 pennies. The initial three issues were 144 pages; this was decreased to 128 pages for the Winter 1951 issue, diminished again to 112 pages for the Spring 1952 issue, and diminished further to 96 pages for the following four issues. The last two issues were 128 pages in length. The distributer was recorded as Wings Publishing Co., in New York for the initial six issues and in Stamford, Connecticut, for the last five issues.