Stories of Magic and Mystery (magazine) 

Stories of Magic and Mystery was a mash magazine which distributed five month to month issues from December 1927 to April 1928. It was altered by Walter Gibson, and distributed a blend of fiction and articles on enchantment. It is presently for the most part associated with having distributed a story by H.P. Lovecraft. 

"Stories of Magic and Mystery" was distributed by Personal Arts, which was claimed by International Correspondence Schools (ICS). In 1927 ICS had accomplishment with a mailing titled "Privileged insights of the Ages". Bill Kofoed and Walter Gibson proposed a magazine to speak to a similar gathering of people as the mailing, and Haddon Press, additionally claimed by ICS, if cost appraises that appeared to be extremely constructive. Kofoed checked the numbers with Haddon Press and was persuaded they were exact, and the magazine was propelled in December of that year with Gibson as editorial manager. 

The supporters included H. P. Lovecraft, with "Cool Air", and Frank Owen, with three stories: "The Yellow Pool", "The Black Well of Wadi", and "The Lure of the Shriveled Hand". A story by Miriam Allen deFord, "Spooky Hands", additionally showed up, however it later ended up clear that it had been printed without consent or installment. Gibson later reviewed that the Kofoed acquired a portion of the entries from stories submitted to "Brief Stories", which Kofoed altered; sci-fi antiquarian Mike Ashley proposes that Gibson might not have been completely mindful of how the entries were gotten, and trusts it is conceivable that a portion of the other material printed was likewise not paid for. 

The magazine is presently very uncommon, and has turned into an authorities' thing a direct result of the association with H. P. Lovecraft. A large portion of Lovecraft's short fiction showed up in "Strange Tales", and it is conceivable that he submitted to "Stories of Magic and Mystery" as a result of his enthusiasm for Harry Houdini—he had secretly composed a story for Houdini a few years sooner, and Gibson was a companion of Houdini's. Notwithstanding fiction the magazine distributed articles about enchantment, which were all composed by Gibson, some under nom de plumes. The articles included one on slug getting (shown by Earle K. Bergey), one on baffling individuals, and an arrangement on Houdini. Generally speaking, the magazine concentrated more on enchantment than on fiction, yet the accounts picked were meaningful. The abnormal and mysterious fiction class was ruled by "Unusual Tales" in the prior years World War II; "Stories of Magic and Mystery" and "Apparition Stories" were the main two magazines to endeavor to equal "Peculiar Tales" in the years prior to 1931, when "Bizarre Tales of Mystery and Terror" showed up. 

After the fifth issue, it ended up clear that the reason the cost assessments had showed up so solid was that Haddon Press had neglected to incorporate the expense of the paper. This made it evident that the magazine was losing cash quickly, and "Stories of Magic and Mystery" was promptly closed down. A portion of the original copies in stock at the time the magazine was shut down may have been imprinted in "Genuine Strange Stories", another brief magazine which Gibson altered the next year. 

Walter B. Gibson was the supervisor of each of the five issues of "Stories of Magic and Mystery", which stayed in seat stapled mash position all through its run. It was valued at 25 pennies, and each issue was 64 pages in length. 

In 2004, Wildside Press discharged a copy version of the February 1928 issue, and in 2013, Adventure House discharged a copy of the March 1928 issue.