Espanto Jr. 

Espanto Jr. is the most conspicuous ring name of Jesăşs Andrade Salas (conceived May 11, 1956), a resigned Mexican "luchador", or proficient wrestler. Over his 25-year-long profession, Andrade worked under various diverse nom de plumes, above all as Espanto Jr. ("Fear Jr."), later on as El Santo Negro ("The Black Saint"), and as the primary individual to fill in as Pentagăłn. Andrade was compelled to resign from wrestling in the wake of enduring dangerous damage amid a match that quickly abandoned him clinically dead before being resuscitated amidst the ring. 

Andrade is a piece of a broad wrestling family begun by his dad who filled in as "El Moro" and is alluded to as the "Moro Family". His child as of now works for Consejo Mundial de Lucha Libre (CMLL), utilizing Andrade's most well known moniker, Espanto Jr. His nephew worked for CMLL for right around 10 years under the name La Sombra, and is presently working for WWE under the name Andrade "Cien" Almas. 

Jesăşs Andrade Salas is the child of expert wrestler El Moro (Spanish for "The Moor") who prepared Andrade and no less than five of his siblings for their expert wrestling professions. A few of his siblings are, or have been proficient wrestlers. His more seasoned sibling, Josăš Andrade Salasa, is best known under the ring name "Brilliante". Two of his siblings are just known freely under their ring names: Moro III and Zafiro/Pentagoncito. Another sibling, Juan Andrade Salsa, has likewise wrestled under the name "Zafiro" at one point in his vocation. Jesăşs' more youthful sibling, Juan Andrade Salasa, has worked under an assortment of ring names, including "Kevin", "Radioactivo" and "El Pollo Asesino". Jesăşs' child is likewise an expert wrestler, filling in as the "enmascarado" (covered) character Espanto Jr., and since he has never been exposed his full name has not been uncovered. His nephew is previous Consejo Mundial de Lucha Libre (CMLL) main event La Sombra, child of Josăš Andrade. 

Andrade made his expert wrestling debut in 1971 utilizing the ring name "El Moro II", and now and again even functioned as "El Moro" like his dad. He would later utilize names, for example, Chuy Andrade and Negro Andrade as he took a shot at the Mexican Independent circuit. 

In 1984, Andrade embraced his most notable ring character: the conceal "Espanto Jr." (Spanish for "Loathsomeness Jr.") who was a storyline child of Espanto I. Espanto I had passed on in 1968 with no children so Andrade was offered consent to utilize the name by the enduring "Los Espantos," Espanto II and Espanto III. He started wrestling wearing the unmistakable highly contrasting cover of the "Los Espantos" group (that likewise incorporated Espanto IV and V) as he started working for the Universal Wrestling Association (UWA). In the wake of working under the moniker for a couple of years he ended up entangled in a fight with El Hijo del Santo, reflecting the quarrel of Hijo del Santo's dad El Santo and Espanto Jr's. storyline father Espanto I. The storyline fight between the two achieved one of its features as the two wrestlers went head to head in a "Lucha de Apuestas", or wager coordinate, where the two wrestlers put their cover on hold. El Hijo del Santo won, reflecting the triumph of El Santo and simply like Espanto I, Espanto Jr. was compelled to expose and never wear the Espanto cover again for the remainder of his wrestling vocation. As a feature of the raising storyline between the two, Espanto Jr. vanquished El Hijo del Santo to win the UWA World Lightweight Championship on July 26, 1987, a title he would hold until May 1, 1988 when El Hijo del Santo recaptured the title. The storyline between the two extended more than quite a long while, with El Hijo del Santo winning "Lucha de Apuestas" coordinates over Espanto on three events, each time constraining Espanto Jr. to have his hair shared off. Espanto Jr. would later lose a comparative "Luchas de Apuestas" match to Super Muăąeco on June 2, 1991. On April 14, 1992 Espanto Jr. vanquished El Hijo del Santo to win the UWA World Welterweight Championship, yet just held it for 41â days before losing it to Celestial. He would in this manner work for World Wrestling Association (WWA) as the UWA started drawing in less observers and in the long run leaving business. In WWA he won the WWA World Welterweight Championship when he vanquished Piloto Suicida and held it for 193â days until losing it to his opponent El Hijo del Santo. He additionally won the WWA World Lightweight Championship by vanquishing El Hijo del Black Shadow. In 1994 Espanto Jr. started working for "Lucha Libre AAA World Wide" (AAA), which had been established a year prior. He worked AAA's "Triplemană­a II-C" appear on May 27, 1994 where he collaborated with Rambo and Magnate to crush the group of Winners, Super Calăł and El Solar when Espanto Jr. stuck El Solar. 

In 1995 AAA proprietor Antonio Peăąa thought of the plan to make a "Detestable twin" to a standout amongst the most well known wrestlers of the time, Andrade's long time in-ring rival El Hijo del Santo. Peăąa picked Andrade to fill the role of El Santo Negro (truly "the Black Saint"), giving him a veil and outfit structure that reflected El Hijo del Santo, just it was basically dark with silver accents while El Hijo del Santo's was essentially silver with dark accents. The idea just kept going a couple of months as El Santo's family protested the encroachment of the trademarked look of El Santo and Hijo del Santo. 

Endeavoring to expand on the fame of AAA wrestler Octagăłn Antonio Peăąa chose to utilize the "detestable partner" idea here rather, transforming Andrade into Pentagăłn, the mirror inverse of Octagăłn. At first the crafty off in six-man or eight-man label group coordinates as an approach to manufacture pressure for singles coordinates further along the storyline. Their first experience came at "Triplemania III-A" the first of AAA's real shows of 1995 when Octagăłn collaborated with Konnan, Perro Aguayo and La Parka to vanquish the group of Pentagăłn, Cien Caras, Măąscara Aăąo 2000 and Jerry Estrada despite the fact that without Pentagăłn and Octagăłn being engaged with the completion of the match. Multi week late at "Triplemania III-An" Octagăłn collaborated with El Hijo del Santo, Rey Misterio Jr. also, La Parka to crush Pentagăłn, Blue Panther, Psicosis and Fuerza Guerrera. Again Octagăłn and Pentagăłn were not engaged with the completion of the match but rather gone head to head a few times in the ring to assist the storyline. In mid 1996, Andrade endured damage amid a match with La Parka when a move made him land off-base. The effect left him quickly clinically dead amidst the ring before being breathed life into back. The damage, combined with his age, constrained Andrade to resign from wrestling. Since the Pentagăłn character wore a veil to cover his whole face it was chosen to give the character to another wrestler who at that point moved toward becoming Pentagăłn without formally expressing that it was an alternate wrestler under the veil now. 

Following his retirement Andrade started concentrating on the El Moro wrestling school alongside a few of his siblings.