A.A.R.M. 

"A.A.R.M." is the aggregate name for the twenty-second and twenty-third scenes of the ninth period of the American satire TV arrangement "The Office", just as the 198th and 199th scene by and large. It was additionally the arrangement's penultimate section, airing seven days before the arrangement finale. It initially disclosed on NBC on May 9, 2013. This scene visitor stars Nora Kirkpatrick, Aaron Rodgers, Clay Aiken, Mark McGrath, Santigold, Jessica St. Clair, and Rachel Crow. 

The series—presented as though it were a genuine documentary—depicts the regular day to day existences of office representatives in the Scranton, Pennsylvania, part of the anecdotal Dunder Mifflin Paper Company. In the scene, Jim Halpert (John Krasinski) persuades Dwight Schrute (Rainn Wilson) that he needs to pick somebody to go about as an Assistant to the Assistant to the Regional Manager (A.A.R.M.); the two in this way hold tryouts for the position. Angela Lipton (Angela Kinsey) is compelled to bring her child, Phillip, to work, and Dwight believes that he might be his child. Pam Halpert's (Jenna Fischer) last feelings of dread about her better half's adoration are settled. Andy Bernard (Ed Helms) endeavors to jump on "America's Next A Cappella Sensation", yet can't try out. At long last, every one of the individuals from the workplace accumulate at Poor Richard's Pub and watch the airing of the authority in-arrangement narrative. 

"A.A.R.M." highlights a sensational scene in which Jim presents a DVD of the features of his association with Pam, finished with him at last giving her a card he wrote in the second season scene "Christmas Party". The plan to have Jim at last give Pam his card had been considered in the journalists' space for quite a while, however just amid "A.A.R.M." did the authors feel it was the ideal time. Moreover, the scene contained a few scenes that were intentionally organized to be reminiscent of past scenes of the arrangement, with scenes impersonating remarkable shots in both the third season portion "Gay Witch Hunt" and the 6th season scene "The Delivery". 

The scene was additionally seen by 4.56 million watchers and got a 2.3/6 percent rating among grown-ups between the ages of 18 and 49, positioning third in its timeslot, making it the most astounding evaluated scene of the period since the prior passage "The Boat". "A.A.R.M." got to a great extent positive audits from commentators. The association between Jim, Pam, and Dwight got specific recognition; many were especially satisfied with the get back to "Christmas Party". Andy's tryout subplot, be that as it may, was profoundly panned. 

Jim Halpert (John Krasinski) persuades provincial chief Dwight Schrute (Rainn Wilson) that he needs to pick somebody to go about as an Assistant to the Assistant to the Regional Manager (A.A.R.M.). Jim plans a few Dwight-arranged difficulties as tryouts for the position, and it is unavoidably discovered that Dwight is the most qualified. Angela Lipton (Angela Kinsey) is compelled to bring her kid, Phillip, to work, after her childcare dismisses her youngster. Dwight, after catching that Phillip has been eating the sort of paper which he himself views as the most tasty, imagines that Angela's child is really his. To test this hypothesis, Dwight offers the tyke either a check for one million dollars or a beet; Phillip picks the beet. Dwight reveals to Angela that he will wed her if the tyke is his, however she denies this is the situation. Dwight then consults with Jim, asking whether he ought to propose to Angela or his sweetheart Esther, whom he supposes is the more coherent decision. Jim discloses to Dwight that he needs to set aside rationale and pursue his impulses. Dwight decides and proposes to Angela, who says yes. Angela at long last uncovers to Dwight that Phillip is to be sure his child, clarifying that she lied about his parentage so as to test Dwight's affections for her. 

Then, Darryl Philbin (Craig Robinson) comes back to Scranton, after discreetly stopping seven days prior to work all day at Athlead, the games advertising organization that Jim established. At the point when the others spot him, they are disturbed that he left without bidding a fond farewell and request to invest some energy with him somehow before he leaves for good. The workplace eventually settles on one last move together. 

At the point when Darryl keeps running into Pam Halpert (Jenna Fischer), he informs her concerning the organization's prosperity and how Jim is passing up a major opportunity by remaining in Scranton. Pam starts to stress that she is making Jim accomplish something that he wouldn't like to do. She stands up to her significant other and concedes that she supposes she probably won't be adequate for him. He asks the in-arrangement narrative group's assistance; the team makes a DVD of the features that they have gathered of Jim and Pam's relationship. The last scene that they use is from the second season Christmas scene "Christmas Party" in which Jim gives Pam a tea kettle as a present, yet reclaims his going with note to her. After Pam watches the DVD, Jim presents her with the genuine, unopened note. She understands it to herself, and, understanding that Jim does really adore her, the two cheerfully grasp. 

Andy Bernard (Ed Helms), who had been terminated in the past scene, tries out for "America's Next A Cappella Sensation". Be that as it may, before he can experiment with, the judges close the tryouts, sending home the rest of the candidates, who have been remaining in line for a considerable length of time. Declining to acknowledge this, he rushes past security and contends with the judges to give him a chance to try out. When they decline, he pitches a crying fit. Afterward, he adventures to Poor Richard's Pub, where he meets his previous office specialists. All together, the workplace watches the official airing of the narrative on PBS's Scranton offshoot station, WVIA-TV. 

"A.A.R.M." was composed by official maker Brent Forrester, denoting his eleventh composition credit for the arrangement, his first since the prior season scene, "Work Bus". It was coordinated by ordinary "Office" supervisor David Rogers, denoting his ninth coordinating credit, and first since the prior season scene "Junior Salesman". The scene was initially expected to air as a half-hour scene, however NBC later declared it is extended to fill an hour vacancy. Dissimilar to the past scenes that were extended, such as "Proceeding onward" and "Livin' the Dream", "A.A.R.M." considers two delivered scenes. 

This scene visitor stars Aaron Rodgers, Clay Aiken, Mark McGrath, Santigold, and Jessica St. Clair. So as to get them, the show contacted "a little gathering of famous people that [the producers] thought would be great". Both Aiken and Santigold acknowledged. Baumgartner then asked Rodgers, who was a companion, and he acknowledged. McGrath later ended up accessible, and he was picked too. Angela's child, Phillip, was played by twins Vince and Evan Edwards. The tyke that shot the scene in which Phillip picked the beet was just expected to point to the beet. At last, the kid said "beet!", which Rogers called "astounding". The voice of the documentarian that reacts to Jim is that of scene chief David Rogers. Rogers likewise voiced a similar character in the season opener "New Guys". Initially, showrunner and arrangement maker Greg Daniels had re-recorded the line in "New Guys", yet wound up preferring Roger's voice better. He requested that he repeat the job in "A.A.R.M." to protect congruity. 

Jules Kmetzko planned the representations of Dwight and Mose, just as Dwight's purposeful publicity picture. He had recently made Pam's watercolor of Dunder Mifflin that held tight the dividers. The majority of the moves were arranged by Mary Ann Kellogg, who had arranged huge numbers of the arrangement's move substantial scenes. The snag course in the stockroom was made by Rogers and Forrester, with contribution from the show's specialty office. Wilson likewise helped, since he in the long run was the person who went through it; it was his plan to have the course end on a raised palette of boxes. Initially, the course should be in the parking area, yet Rogers moved it, feeling that the stockroom was "increasingly natural" and that the warmth would have been hindering to the completed item. The plan to have Jim at long last give Pam his card had been considered in the scholars' space for quite a while, however just amid "A.A.R.M." did the journalists feel it was the ideal time. The card and envelope was a similar one utilized for "Christmas Party" right around seven years earlier. Truth be told, the card contained an authentic message that Krasinski composed for Fischer. Rogers conceded that the Pam and Jim video was enlivened by various fan recordings that exist on the web. The reason that "Open Your Eyes" by Snow Patrol plays over the video is that Claire Scanlon, the arrangement editorial manager, felt that it was comparable in style to "Sing" by Travis, which played in the second season scene "The Client". 

The scene contained a few scenes that were reminiscent of past scenes of the arrangement. The shot in which Jim and Dwight study the workplace was recorded to be like a scene that highlighted Dwight and Michael in the third season portion "Gay Witch Hunt". Furthermore, Dwight pulling Angela over was taped in a manner that reviewed the 6th season scene "The Delivery". In spite of the fact that the scene wherein Jim offers guidance to Dwight was shot along these lines to Jim's goodbye to Michael in the seventh season scene "Farewell, Michael", it was not deliberately expected to seem as though it, as indicated by Rogers. Likewise, the deterrent course was not an immediate reference to the second season scene "Office Olympics", in spite of the fact that Rogers comprehended that there were likenesses. 

Jim references both Michael J. Fox and the 1985 film "Back to the Future" amid his "drivel" gathering room meeting. Dwight understands that Phillip is his child after the kid takes a gander at a little scale reproduction of the Battlestar "Galactica", anecdotal ship from the sci-fi arrangement of a similar name, similarly that Dwight does. Dwight's test to check whether Phillip is his child has been contrasted with a comparable scene in the 1997 film "Kundun", in which Tibetan priests practice a comparative custom. To prevail upon Kevin, Angela and Oscar imagine that infant Phillip gave him an iTunes gift voucher. Darryl and the remainder of the workplace move to the tune "Boogie Wonderland" by Earth, Wind, and Fire. The show Andy tries out for "America's Next A Cappella Sensation", is a spoof of famous singing shows like "American Idol", "The Voice", and "The Sing-Off". The anecdotal show is facilitated by Mark McGrath, the lead artist from the musical gang Sugar Ray. The judges for the show incorporate Aaron Rodgers, Clay Aiken, and Santigold. Rodgers is an American football quarterback for the Green Bay Packers, Aiken is a vocalist who picked up noticeable quality after the second period of "American Idol" in 2003, and Santigold is an American artist, musician, and maker. Andy sings both the Cornell University institute of matriculation ("Far Above Cayuga's Waters"), just as "You're Never Fully Dressed Without a Smile" from the melodic "Annie". The lady trying out that he hinders is Rachel Crow, who accomplished notoriety in the wake of contending in season one of "The X-Factor". 

"A.A.R.M." initially circulated on May 9, 2013 on NBC. In its unique American communicate, "A.A.R.M." was seen by an expected 4.56 million watchers and got a 2.3 rating/6% share among grown-ups between the ages of 18 and 49. This implies it was seen by 2.3 percent of every one of the 18-to 49-year-olds, and 6 percent of each of the 18-to 49-year-olds staring at the TV at the season of the communicate. This denoted a noteworthy increment, of just about one million watchers, in the appraisals from the past scene, "Livin' the Dream". It was likewise the most-watched scene of "The Office" since the prior ninth season scene "The Boat", which had disclosed on November 8, 2012 and was viewed by 4.83 million watchers. The scene positioned third in its half-hour timeslot, being beaten by a scene of the ABC dramatization "Dark's Anatomy" which got a 3.1/9 rating and a passage of the CBS arrangement "Individual of Interest" which scored a 2.4/7 rating. "The Office" was additionally the most noteworthy evaluated NBC arrangement of the night. 

Alan Sepinwall of HitFix gave the scene a positive audit, and composed that "as a semi finale, 'A.A.R.M.' was shockingly ... astounding in many territories." He especially delighted in the collaboration among Jim and Dwight, calling it "so much fun"; he contended that the show would have presumably fared better after Steve Carell's takeoff had the power dynamic and connection among Jim and Dwight that was investigated in "A.A.R.M." been built up prior in the eighth season. He presumed that "The best pieces of 'A.A.R.M.' felt like a fitting near the non-narrative survey segment of the arrangement." M. Monster of Television Without Pity was satisfied with the scene, and granted it an "A" grade, the first for the arrangement since "Farewell, Michael" very nearly two seasons back. Jenna Mullins of E! Online composed that the scene "was brimming with passionate minutes that appeared as though love letters to the fans who have watched the show since the pilot." Mullins likewise applauded the scenes among Jim and Pam, taking note of that "we crumbled in tears on the grounds that the couple we've been pulling for ... can in any case discover approaches to make us cry." 

Scratch Campbell of TV.com felt that the scene was "a conventional if uneven penultimate scene that gave us one final take a gander at this idiosyncratic gathering of individuals in their office condition". He was to a great extent content with the arrival of the carefree form of Jim, taking note of that "Pam referenced that she adores 'Ridiculous Jim' and I, need to concede, I cherish Goofy Jim myself". Campbell felt that the scene fiddled with fan administration, however that it was normal and required for the show to have a fruitful closure. Roth Cornet of IGN granted the scene a 8.5 out of 10, meaning an "extraordinary" scene. She composed that "The exchange between Jim, Dwight, and Pam has been the center of the arrangement since Michael Scott's flight, and it was great to see the trio up front indeed as "The Office" finds some conclusion." Furthermore, Cornet was content with Dwight's proposition and the move party that flagged Darryl's leaving, calling the last "a cut of rapture". 

Erik Adams of "The A.V. Club" gave the scene a "B+". He said that "what benefits 'AARM' generally ... is a simple Jim-and-Dwight storyline" that represented the development that the characters have encountered over the most recent nine years. He composed that there were many delicate minutes in the scene, for example, Dwight and Jim's showdown, Pam and Jim's reaffirmation of adoration, and Dwight's proposition to Angela. He reasoned that "It's that mix of fresh starts and shutting circles that makes 'AARM' a powerful second-to-last part of "The Office"". Dan Forcella of TV Fanatic granted the scene four-and-a-half stars out of five, and composed that the scene "didn't baffle". He called "the scene in which Pam was viewing the docu-made montage similarly as Jim was giving Dwight love guidance" the "most sincerely remunerating minute on "The Office" since Michael Scott's farewell." 

Numerous commentators were very satisfied with the get back to the tea kettle and Jim's note from "Christmas Party". Adams felt that the scene, before the uncover of the note, was appropriately executed, and that the note made it far superior. Sepinwall called it "a fantastic result for long-lasting fans". Cornet called the grouping "powerful". Rick Porter of Zap2it composed that it was a "decent move" with respect to the scholars for "not telling us what Jim composed on the card from 'Christmas Party' [because] it must be really epic." 

Alternately, most faultfinders gave Andy's plot a negative audit. Sepinwall called the whole plot "godawfulness". Campbell alluded to it as "an average story that remained as a distinct difference to the enthusiastic timbre of the remainder of the scene". Cornet called the scenes "similarly as detached from the center of the show as that character has for quite a while." Porter composed that "the show never entirely understood how to manage the character this season", and his subplot in "A.A.R.M." was the climax of this issue.