Monique Jeffries 

Investigator Monique Jeffries is an anecdotal character played by Michelle Hurd in the American wrongdoing dramatization TV arrangement "" on NBC. A normal character amid the primary season, Jeffries is an extreme and road savvy criminologist with the New York City Police Department's Special Victims Unit, and quickly the accomplice of John Munch (Richard Belzer). Subsequent to being damaged by a brush with death, Jeffries is calmed of dynamic obligation when she confesses to engaging in sexual relations with a suspect in a past assault case. 

Hurd was thrown in the wake of having showed up in other TV programs by "Law and Order" maker Dick Wolf. In spite of the fact that Wolf guaranteed her Jeffries would grow progressively after some time, Hurd became disappointed with the absence of material for her character. The show's makers dithered to keep her as Munch's full-time accomplice and considered dispensing with the character from the show out and out. Hurd in the end withdrew herself to join the dramatization TV arrangement "Jump Years". The performer earned some basic applause for her execution as Jeffries, yet a few reporters said the character was never legitimately fleshed out. 

Monique Jeffries is an extreme and road savvy analyst with the Special Victims Unit of the New York City Police Department. After quickly banding together with Ken Briscoe (Chris Orbach), she turns into the lasting accomplice of John Munch (Richard Belzer) after his past accomplice, Brian Cassidy (Dean Winters), leaves the unit. The two every so often conflict identities and have a wry compatibility with one another. While pursuing an assault suspect amid one case, Jeffries is almost slaughtered when the suspect gets into a vehicle that detonates. She at first shows up damaged by the episode, yet later feels elated over having endure and begins carrying on neglectfully. She has a few one-night remains with numerous accomplices (here and there together) and goes for broke at work, getting to be something of an unstable presence. One night at a bar, she meets a man who had been a suspect in a past assault case and has a wild blow out with him at his place. When she uncovers the episode amid a session with a police specialist, she is removed from dynamic obligation per One Police Plaza and works a work area work. She items to the exchange and takes steps to sue the division. Rather, she is exchanged to the Vice division, and her old employment in the Special Victims Unit is taken by Fin Tutuola (Ice-T). 

Michelle Hurd had showed up on the TV arrangement "Law and Order", showing up on the seventh season scene "Ensnarement" in 1997. Hurd additionally recently showed up in the TV programs "New York Undercover" and "Players", the two of which were delivered by "Law and Order" maker Dick Wolf. At the point when Wolf drew closer Hurd to fill the role of Monique Jeffries, he cautioned her that the part was little at first however could possibly create, advising her, "Think about her as a blossom, she'll sprout later, yet for the pilot she's simply got a scene." The character additionally had less screen-time than others in the arrangement, to a limited extent so that Hurd could acknowledge theater jobs. Be that as it may, Hurd felt the Jeffries character never got the advancement guaranteed, asserting she "simply perused directions" while filling the role. While she enjoyed being a piece of the cast, Hurd said she was disappointed with the absence of material for her character, especially when visitor stars had more created jobs than Jeffries herself. 

At the point when Dean Winters left from the show and a perpetual swap for the Brian Cassidy character was required, Hurd experienced difficulty persuading system authorities she was right for the part. Ted Kotcheff, the show's co-official maker, said it was too repetitive to even consider having two man-lady sets of accomplices, with heroes Elliot Stabler and Olivia Benson as of now banded together. Kotcheff felt Munch and Jeffries blending weakened the relationship of Stabler and Benson on the grounds that it was a "perfect representation" of their organization. In spite of the fact that Hurd felt increasingly female characters ought to be a piece of a sex violations unit, she stated, "I comprehend the business, and what systems need, and they needed somebody to have an effect, a rating." The makers had exchanges about expelling Jeffries from the show so that Benson would be the main lady in the squad room, yet no choices were ever constructed. 

Hurd eventually left from the arrangement amid the to join the Showtime dramatization arrangement "Jump Years". After her takeoff from the show, Hurd stated, "I believe it's simply dismal they didn't have confidence to stick around with me." However, she said she bore no evil emotions about her time on "Law and Order: Special Victims Unit", yet felt the throwing on "Jump Years" was an "uncommon chance". Roger Friedman, an amusement writer for Fox News, announced that Richard Belzer masterminded Hurd to be terminated in light of the fact that her character was getting an excessive number of story-lines and diverting consideration from him, however that report was never affirmed. Despite the fact that Jeffries left from the Special Victims Unit amid the scene "In half", her character was as yet present in the scene "Runaway", which denoted the character's last appearance. "Runaway" was initially expected to air before "To shreds" yet was communicated out of request. 

Gail Pennington of the "St. Louis Post-Dispatch" said of the character, "her job was marginal to the point that her nonappearance scarcely enrolled" after she withdrew the arrangement. Ken Parish Perkins of the "Stronghold Worth Star-Telegram" called Michelle Hurd a solid individual from a "strong cast". The "South Florida Sun-Sentinel" said the character had "undiscovered potential" that seemed prepared to be tapped after Dean Winters left the show, and the paper communicated dissatisfaction it was never accomplished. In a meeting with "Orlando Sentinel" about the arrangement, New York Police Department Detective Ted Sica said Jeffries' closet was unreasonably uncovering for an investigator, and that the genuine office would not permit her tank tops and tight vests: "We don't endure that, particularly in a sex wrongdoings unit. We're endeavoring to be somewhat honorable."