Ashurbanipal (design) 

Ashurbanipal, otherwise called the Ashurbanipal Monument or the Statue of Ashurbanipal, is a bronze model by Fred Parhad, a craftsman of Assyrian plummet. It is situated in the Civic Center of San Francisco, California, in the United States. The statue portraying the Assyrian lord of a similar name was charged by the Assyrian Foundation for the Arts and displayed to the City of San Francisco in 1988 as a blessing from the Assyrian individuals. The model allegedly cost $100,000 and was the primary "sizable" bronze statue of Ashurbanipal. It is controlled by the City and County of San Francisco and the San Francisco Arts Commission. 

Parhad's work was met with some analysis by neighborhood Assyrians, who contended it was off base to depict Ashurbanipal holding an earth tablet and a lion, or wearing a skirt. The pundits thought the statue looked increasingly like the Sumerian lord Gilgamesh; Renee Kovacs, a "researcher and self-expressed Assyriologist", trusted the model portrayed neither figure, but instead a Mesopotamian "defensive figure". Parhad protected the exactness of his work, while additionally conceding that he took imaginative freedoms. 

In Assyrian design, the popular gigantic passage way gatekeeper figures of "lamassu" were regularly joined by a legend getting a handle on a wriggling lion with one hand and commonly a snake with the other, likewise titanic and in high help; these are commonly the main different kinds of high alleviation in Assyrian form. They proceed with the Master of Animals custom in Mesopotamian workmanship, and may speak to Enkidu, a focal figure in the Ancient Mesopotamian "Epic of Gilgamesh". In the royal residence of Sargon II at Khorsabad, a gathering of somewhere around seven "lamassu" and two such saints with lions encompassed the passageway to the "position of royalty room", "a grouping of figures which created a mind-boggling impression of intensity." The course of action was rehashed in Sennacherib's castle at Nineveh. 

"Ashurbanipal" was structured by Fred Parhad, an Iraqi-conceived craftsman of Assyrian plummet. Parhad rejected formal expressions learns at the University of California, Berkeley and moved to New York, where the Metropolitan Museum of Art enabled him to contemplate its Assyrian accumulation. The work was appointed by the Assyrian Foundation for the Arts under the heading of its leader, Narsai David. The Assyrian Universal Alliance Foundation likewise claims to have authorized the work. Assets were gathered from Assyrians all through the United States. 

In 1987, "The Telegraph" detailed that the work cost $100,000 and was the primary "sizable" bronze statue of Ashurbanipal. It was introduced to the City of San Francisco as a blessing from the Assyrian individuals on May 29, 1988, divulged at the section to the Asian Art Museum on Van Ness Avenue. The statue presently remains on Fulton Street between the Main Library and Asian Art Museum, inside the city's Civic Center. It is directed by the City and County of San Francisco and the San Francisco Arts Commission. 

The Smithsonian Institution records Frank Tomsick as the establishment's designer and MBT Associates as its building firm. "Ashurbanipal" was studied by the Smithsonian's Save Outdoor Sculpture! program in 1992. In 1996, plans for a Civic Center person on foot shopping center were being created by the San Francisco Planning and Urban Research Association; one organizer upheld for development of an Assyrian garden, including lotus blooms, pomegranate trees and reeds, at the site of the statue. 

The patinated bronze statue, mounted on a base and a plinth to achieve a complete stature of , weighs roughly . It portrays Ashurbanipal, the Assyrian ruler known for structure the eponymously named Library of Ashurbanipal, the first and biggest library in Nineveh. The hairy lord is indicated wearing studs and a tunic; he is holding a book (or dirt tablet) in one arm and a lion whelp in the other. As indicated by the Historical Marker Database, the tablet peruses in cuneiform: "Harmony unto paradise and earth/Peace unto nations and urban areas/Peace unto the inhabitants in all terrains/This is the statue exhibited to the City of San Francisco by the Assyrian individuals in the 210th year of America's sway". 

The "overwhelming", full length statue remains over a plinth embellished with a lotus bloom plan and a solid base with an enemy of spray painting covering. The base incorporates rosettes and a bronze plaque. One engraving beneath the statue peruses the content of the tablet in English, Akkadian cuneiform and Aramaic. The content "Ashurbanipal, King of Assyria, 669–627 B.C." shows up above and the content "Committed May 29, 1988" shows up beneath, both in English. Another engraving beneath the statue peruses, "Exhibited to the City of San Francisco by the Assyrian Foundation for the Arts through gifts of American Assyrian Association of San Francisco/Assyrian American National Federation", trailed by a rundown of names of givers. In December 2010, the "San Francisco Chronicle" announced that a huge plaque from the model was absent. 

In December 1987, as news started to flow about the appointed work, nearby Assyrians blamed Parhad for distorting Ashurbanipal. Reactions incorporated the portrayal of the lord holding both a book and a lion, which they contended he "wouldn't do", and for dressing him in a skirt, which they asserted he could never have worn. The faultfinders thought the statue made a superior depiction of the Sumerian lord Gilgamesh. One commentator stated: It's straightforward. The statue speaks to Gilgamesh... No Assyrian has a privilege to envision things about our lord. It's actually similar to making a duplicate of the Statue of Liberty and saying it is George Washington... Assyrian lords didn't wear miniskirts. They wouldn't have been holding a lion or a book. It's an affront to the Assyrians. Narsai David reacted: They are qualified for their sentiment... We have never said this is a historical center quality proliferation... We have dependably said this is a portrayal of Ashurbanipal as done by a twentieth century craftsman. In the event that they think about this as Gilgamesh, they are allowed to do as such. 

Renee Kovacs, a "researcher and self-expressed Assyriologist", said the statue delineated neither Ashurbanipal or Gilgamesh, yet rather a Mesopotamian "defensive figure, similar to a watchman." Parhad guarded the precision of his work, while additionally conceding that he took imaginative freedoms and endeavored to fuse the different parts of Assyrian culture, from its chasing dominance to its appreciation for composing. He said of the model: The piece has bona fide characteristics to it, yet it is likewise my statue... With the hoops and the dress and the hair and his blades, it is Ashurbanipal. In any case, in the decision of (position), the way that he is holding a tablet and a lion, that is mine. I needed myself to be spoken to in the piece.