Genuine and True 

"Genuine and True" is a tune composed and performed by American rapper Future, American vocalist Miley Cyrus, and English artist Mr Hudson. It was discharged as a solitary on November 5, 2013, by A1 Records, Freebandz, and Epic Records. Delivered by the craftsmen's successive teammate Mike Will Made It, the tune is a pop and R&B track, the verses of which portray an everlasting affection. 

"Genuine and True" got commonly ideal audits from music pundits, who complimented its general generation and melodious substance, however felt that the vocals were over-prepared. Its going with music video debuted on November 10, 2013, going before the rebroadcast of the 2013 MTV Europe Music Awards in the United States. 

Future and Cyrus had first worked together on the track "My Darlin'" for Cyrus' fourth studio collection "Bangerz" (2013). The verses of "My Darlin'" concern the apprehension following a fizzled relationship and the concurrent want to accommodate. Afterward, Cyrus communicated enthusiasm for "Genuine and True", recording her vocals for the ensemble. Mr Hudson likewise recorded vocals for the ensemble, which were fused with Cyrus' singing. Future composed the rest of the sections to supplement the commitments of Cyrus and Mr Hudson, however the two got credits for being co-essayists. The track was discharged on November 5, 2013. Future raps the primary refrain, which is in third-individual viewpoint, Cyrus raps the second stanza and Future raps the third section. Mr Hudson sings the ensemble (with the exception of the second time, where it is sung by Cyrus) and Cyrus and Future join Mr Hudson on the melody the fourth and fifth time. The melody had initially spilled with an additional stanza from Future, however it was cut from the last form. 

"Genuine and True" is a pop and R&B tune, the verses of which portray an everlasting adoration. Amid the melody, Cyrus and Mr. Hudson sing the verses "When the sun kicks the bucket and the stars blur from view/Our affection will stay genuine and genuine/Through the separation and cold profundities of room/The radio sings our tune/It's an adoration genuine and genuine". Carolyn Menyes from MusicTimes noticed that the craftsmen's vocals vigorously depended on Auto-Tune innovation, which she credited with giving a "strong sound all through the track". Future recommended that "Genuine and True" was melodiously roused by his fiancăše, American chronicle craftsman Ciara, remarking "it may astound individuals what I'm stating 'cause I'm talking on my relationship and all that I'm experiencing at the present time and endeavoring to catch that minute." "Genuine and True" was delivered by Mike Will Made It, who as often as possible works together with Cyrus and Future. 

The melody is performed in the key of B major with a rhythm of 70 beats for each moment in like manner time. 

"Genuine and True" got commonly ideal audits from music commentators, who complimented its general creation and melodious substance, yet felt that the vocals were over-handled. Erika Ramirez from "Board" felt that "Cyrus takes the spotlight with her vocal ability" amid her stanza of the track, while Alex Young of Consequence of Sound lauded the account as a "vibe decent love melody featured by a great snare", including that Future conveyed a "fragile blend of rap and arousing warbles". Composing for "Shout!", Josiah Hughes delighted in the "general sentiment of affection and goodness" present all through the tune. Carl Williott from Idolator complimented Mike Will Made It's generation commitments, and called the track "beautiful". Carolyn Menyes of MusicTimes remarked that the track "expresses what is on its mind and is delicate" regardless of "under-using" Cyrus' vocals. 

A going with music video for "Genuine and True" debuted on November 10, 2013, going before the rebroadcast of the 2013 MTV Europe Music Awards in the United States. The clasp starts as space travelers Future and Mr Hudson find the carcass of another space explorer, depicted by Cyrus. In the wake of being restored on a surgical table, Cyrus (shrouded in silver sparkle) and Future are appeared singing their individual sections to each other. Blended all through the video are scenes of Mr Hudson singing the melody. As the clasp completions, Future and Mr Hudson are indicated leaving the planet where they discovered Cyrus on their harmed rocket. 

Referencing prior pictures from the music video before its official discharge, Edwin Ortiz expressed that its subject was a "space age romantic tale", further opining that it shared a space-themed idea with Future's introduction studio collection "Pluto" (2012). Zoe Shenton from the "Day by day Mirror" gave a great survey to the music video, remarking "garments or no garments, [Cyrus] looks and sounds unimaginable". An essayist for "The Huffington Post" imagined that the "properly advanced visuals" supplemented the space-themed verses in the tune. 

"Genuine and True" appeared on the South Korea Gaon Single Chart at number 189 amid the seven day stretch of November 3 to 9, 2013. In the United States, the melody crested at number 3 on the US Bubbling Under Hot 100 singles graph.