Lamu Fort 

Lamu Fort is a post in the town of Lamu in northeastern Kenya. Initially arranged on the waterfront, the fortification today is situated in a focal position in the town, about from the primary pier on the shore. 

Lamu Fort was worked somewhere in the range of 1813 and 1821 with Omani help. At first it gave a base from which the Omanis combined their control of the East African coast yet the town later lost its monetary significance. Amid the British provincial time frame, and after the freedom of Kenya, the fortification was utilized as a jail. Today it houses an ecological gallery and library, and is regularly utilized for network occasions. 

Lamu Fort is a cautious structure that was raised at the southeast corner of te old stone town of Lamu. 

The fortification was worked adjacent to the Pwani Mosque, the most established known mosque in Lamu, with inceptions in the fourteenth century. The fortress initially lay on the waterfront, which at that point kept running along the principle road of the town yet has since withdrawn. 

Thomas Boteler, who visited Lamu in 1823, portrayed the stronghold as "an expansive square structure, with a pinnacle at each corner, however developed so somewhat that more likely than not the release of its honeycombed arms would before long convey the entire texture to the ground." It had an "extensive vaulted passage ... [and] comprised of three accounts of galleries, upheld inside by curves. Chief W. F. W. Owen, who visited in the meantime, noticed that the stronghold was "one hundred yards square, and encompassed by dividers from forty to fifty feet high." 

Today the fortress is in a focal position in the town. It is arranged about from the fundamental wharf on the shore. The post today is a gigantic two-story stone structure. The squat and ground-breaking structure appears differently in relation to the exquisite Swahili engineering of different structures in the town. 

Development of the post seems to have been begun by Fumomadi, Sultan of Pate. The Mazrui pioneer Abdalla canister Hemed, in an uneasy coalition with Pate, was likewise engaged with the development. One story was assembled, however with the demise of Funomadi in 1809 development stopped. In 1812 Lamu picked up a sudden triumph at the Battle of Shela over the powers of Pate and Mombasa. The proceeded with danger provoked them to call for assistance from Oman. Said container Sultan, Sultan of Muscat and Oman (r. 1804–1856), was said to have aided the recharged development, which started in 1813 and was finished around 1821. 

Sultan Sayyid Said container Sultan sent a senator to Lamu around 1814. 

He gave a defensive army of Baluchi warriors. As per Boteler, the fundamental gatekeeper comprised of "around twenty Muscat troopers, relaxing on the stone seats on either side, with eye expectation on opportunity, and equipped with their shields, swords and pikes. A substantial combination of matchlocks, suspended from the dividers above them, took after those utilized by the crude little arm men in England." However, the security offered by the fortress supported development around it amid the nineteenth century, including a shopfront. 

The significance of Lamu in the Lamu Archipelago developed to the detriment of Pate in the years that pursued the stronghold's development. The Sultan utilized Lamu Fort as a base for crushing the Mazrui revolts in Mombasa, and for building up authority over the East African coast. He moved the capital of his sultanate to Zanzibar. With its vital significance lost, Lamu before long declined in monetary significance in contrast with Mombasa and Zanzibar. 

Lamu Fort was transformed into a jail in 1910 by the British pioneer organization. During the 1950s Mau prisoners were held in the fortification. 

The fortification kept on being utilized as a jail after the freedom of Kenya until 1984. 

It was then given to the National Museums of Kenya, who changed over the fortification into a historical center with assistance from the Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency. 

The Lamu Fort was pronounced a booked landmark on 15 May 1984. Rebuilding was attempted cautiously. A transitory show was opened in 1993. 

The fortification today incorporates a historical center with a presentation on the ground floor essentially worried about ecological preservation. The patio is utilized by the neighborhood network for gatherings, weddings and open exhibitions. 

There are workplaces, research facilities and a workshop on the second floor, and a meeting office that is accessible for lease. The fortification houses a library with an incredible gathering of Swahili verse and reference material on Lamu. 

The bulwarks of the stronghold give all encompassing perspectives on the town. 

Notes 

References 

Sources