CSG International 

CSG is a global partnership headquartered in Greenwood Village, Colorado. It gives Business Support Systems (BSS) programming and administrations, fundamentally to the broadcast communications industry. 

CSG was established by Neal Hansen as a division of First Data in 1982. It turned into a free organization when it was gained by CSG Holdings in 1994 for $137 million. An agreement with Tele-Communications Inc. (TCI), the biggest satellite TV business at the time, was compelling in the organization's development from $80 million in income in 1994 to $171 million by 1997. CSG opened up to the world in 1996. A question with TCI over valuing prompted a $120 million mediation settlement in 2002 with Comcast, who procured the TCI business. The two kept on working together and extended their relationship in 2014. CSG made in excess of ten acquisitions during the 2000s, for the most part of organizations that sold charging, client administration and activities programming. 

CSG was established in 1982 by Neal Hansen under the name Cable Services Group (CSG) as a division of the installment preparing organization First Data Corporation. At the time First Data was worked by American Express, which gained a controlling enthusiasm for the organization in 1980. CSG turned into a piece of the American Express Information Services Company, which was shaped in 1989. The CSG gathering's first expansive scale charging proclamation handling focus, which prints and sends bills to shoppers, was set up in Omaha in 1990. 

Hansen left the Cable Services Group one year after it was established to progress toward becoming CEO of Applied Communications, where he met George Haddix. Hansen and Haddix shaped CSG Holdings with Morgan Stanley and Trident Investment Group in 1994, which obtained Cable Services Group that year for $137 million. In November 1994, Cable Services Group was renamed to CSG Systems International. 

CSG was the second biggest charging administrations supplier for the US digital media business by 1994, serving 27 percent of satellite TV endorsers. Be that as it may, as indicated by "The International Directory of Company Histories", its overall revenues were little and the organization was "still needing a turnaround." "Broadcasting and Cable" said CSG had lost bearing and turned out to be self-satisfied. Haddix and Hansen actualized changes at the organization, which incited 350 out of 500 representatives to leave the firm inside a couple of months. 

The new CSG developed rapidly. The union of telephone, web, on-request motion pictures, and different administrations made progressively complex charging courses of action between broadcast communications organizations and shoppers, which prompted increasingly broad utilization of charging administrations suppliers like CSG. Proficient administrations and worldwide customers, which were already not a critical part of incomes, developed to 22 percent of incomes by the mid-1990s. 

So as to satisfy obligation and raise financing for acquisitions, CSG held a first sale of stock in February 1996, which esteemed the firm at five-crease its unique obtaining cost. CSG developed from $80 million in yearly incomes when it was obtained, to $132.3 million when it opened up to the world in 1996 and $171.7 million by 1997. 

During the 1990s, Tele-Communications Inc. (TCI) and Time Warner rejected endeavors to make inside charging programming and contracted CSG International. The 15-year understanding CSG marked with TCI on August 11, 1997 made CSG the biggest seller in the business and was the essential supporter of its development during the '90s. By 2001, the arrangement was in charge of 45 percent of CSG's income. As a major aspect of the arrangement, CSG likewise procured TCI's inside created programming, SummiTrack, for $106 million. CSG's administrations to TCI included charging, client the executives and installment preparing for TCI clients. In October 1997, CSG International marked its first arrangement with an utilities organization, mc2. 

Toward the finish of 1997, CSG prime supporter George Haddix resigned, and previous EVP Jack Pogge was named President and Chief Operating Officer in his place. In 1999 CSG started developing another bill preparing focus in Florida in an arrangement with nearby government, which extended streets and gave different impetuses. In 2002, CSG obtained the charging programming interests of Lucent Technologies for $260 million. The arrangement was assessed to build CSG's incomes by 38 percent and its headcount by 65 percent. 200 Lucent representatives were laid off because of the procurement. An extra 100 - 150 CSG workers were laid off soon thereafter in light of poor financial conditions. 

AT&T obtained TCI in 2000, acquiring its concurrence with CSG. AT&T asserted CSG was not keeping the agreement's terms to give good rates. A lawful question between the two organizations started in 2001 in assertion court. Before the question was settled, AT&T Broadband was procured by Comcast, who needed to utilize its own charging and client administration merchant. In October 2002, a judge decided that CSG owed Comcast a $120 million discount and that it needed to diminish its costs. The two organizations differ about whether the decision would permit Comcast to stop their understanding before the finish of its term. CSG and Comcast achieved new understandings or expansions in March 2004 and in 2008. In 2014 its work with Comcast was extended to cover the majority of its client backing and charging for private administrations. 

In March 2005, prime supporter Neal Hansen resigned at 64 years old. Ed Nafus, earlier leader of the broadband administrations division, had his spot. Nafus was supplanted as CEO by Peter Kalan, toward the finish of 2007. In November 2015, it was declared that Bret Griess would succeed Kalan as president and CEO. 

Starting at 2016, CSG spread to the span of 33 workplaces in 22 nations. This does exclude minor 'satellite workplaces'. 

CSG gives programming and administrations to overseeing client information, examining that information, charging and client administration. For instance, client administration agents may utilize CSG frameworks to look into a purchaser's records and include another administration, or business examiners may dig client information for patterns. As indicated by the organization's site, its essential item territories are income the executives, content administration and adaptation, and client cooperation the executives. CSG additionally prints and sends charging explanations to buyers and gives call-focus administrations. 

CSG initially sold two adaptations of its charging procedure redistributing administrations. Under new authority in 1994, it started building up extra programming and giving counseling to in-house charging divisions. Amid this period it created CSG Workforce Express, a suite of programming items that deal with the dispatch of professionals and different coordinations at client destinations. Workforce Express comprises of three applications: CSG Workforce Management, CSG TechNet and CSG TechNet CE, which coordinate with CSG's databases and charging frameworks. It additionally created CSG Care Express, which is for making on the web self-administration entrances for buyers to view and pay their bills on the web. 

During the 1990s CSG presented the ACSR (Advanced Customer Service Representative) framework. An augmentation to ACSR called ProfitNow! was presented in 2003. ProfitNow! utilized a shopper's record information to prompt client administration delegates on the probability of a guest dropping their administration or purchasing another item. It was later transformed into an online framework with a UI like Microsoft Windows at CSG.net. CSG obtained the Kenan FX programming from Lucent Technologies in 2002. Kenan programming oversaw charging and requesting and gave center product to enable different client to administration and charging items coordinate with one another. CSG NextGen was presented for global markets, with help for different dialects. In March 2014, CSG added a cybersecurity suite to its item portfolio, under the name CSG Invotas. The organization discharged CSG Ascendon, an advanced stage for correspondences specialist co-ops, in March 2015. The stage utilizes content adaptation and conveyance frameworks without rolling out over the top improvements to existing foundation. In November 2015 the Invotas unit was spun off into a different element. Invotas was gained by FireEye in an exchange that shut February 1, 2016. 

CSG parent organization, CSG Systems International Inc., is recorded on the NASDAQ stock trade. Starting at 2015, its biggest customers were Comcast, DISH and Time Warner Cable, speaking to 24, 14 and 12 percent of its incomes individually. CSG spends roughly 14 percent of its incomes on innovative work. Its incomes are around 77 percent from installment preparing and related administrations, 12 percent from programming and the rest of progressing specialized help. 85 percent of incomes are from the Americas.