4x4 (tune) 

"4x4" is a tune by American account craftsman Miley Cyrus highlighting American rapper Nelly from Cyrus' fourth studio collection "Bangerz" (2013). It was composed and created by Pharrell Williams, with extra songwriting given by Cyrus and Nelly. The tune is a nation rap track that talks about having some good times through the similitude of a 4x4 truck. The tune is inspected in British non mainstream musical crew Alt-J's 2014 single "Craving of the Pine". 

"4x4" got commonly positive surveys from contemporary music pundits, who valued its general generation and uniqueness contrasted with different tracks included on "Bangerz". Notwithstanding not having been discharged as a solitary, it topped at number 41 on the U.S. "Bulletin" Pop Digital Songs graph. Cyrus initially played out the tune amid her scene of "MTV Unplugged" in January 2014, and has additionally performed it amid her Bangerz Tour. In August 2014, Ubisoft uncovered that the tune will show up in Just Dance 2015. 

In 2012, Cyrus declared designs to concentrate on her movie profession, adequately putting her melodic undertakings on rest. That year, she showed up in the movies "LOL" and "So Undercover". She was additionally affirmed as an essential voice on-screen character in the element film "Lodging Transylvania", yet dropped out of the undertaking to facilitate a melodic rebound. In January 2013, Cyrus finished her chronicle contract with Hollywood Records, under which she discharged the studio collections "" (2007), "Breakout" (2008), "Can't Be Tamed" (2010), and the all-encompassing play (EP) "The Time of Our Lives" (2009). Soon thereafter, she marked an account contract with RCA Records. In March, she affirmed that her fourth studio collection would be discharged before the finish of 2013. 

It was reported that Nelly would show up on Cyrus' collection "Bangerz" (2013) when its track posting was affirmed on September 10. Their joint effort, "4x4", was composed by Cyrus, Nelly, and Pharrell Williams; it was created by Williams and designed by John Hanes. Andrew Coleman orchestrated, recorded, and altered the tune with help from Todd Hurtt and Matthew Desrameaux; it was later blended by Serban Ghenea. Nelly remarked that the track mixes components of pop, hip bounce, and down home music, and explained that "it's tied in with having a ton of fun; sort of how a 4x4 truck symbolizes resistance ... you know, squashing out, needing to ride with the awful young men." He included that Cyrus "completes a touch of rapping and a bit of singing" on the tune, which he felt was a manner by which she "conveys what needs be". 

"4x4" got commonly ideal surveys from contemporary music faultfinders. Composing for AllMusic, Heather Phares portrayed the track as an "unlikely however engaging bit of nation rap", and recognized it as an emerge track from "Bangerz". Marah Eakin from "The A.V. Club" opined that its "dynamic" generation was like a ""Scale"- period Matthew Herbert", and remarked that its melodious substance "[takes] the tune in a senseless Bonnie and Clyde heading". Scratch Catucci from "Excitement Weekly" was complimentary towards the "winningly nutty Pharrell generation", while Kyle Fowle from Slant Magazine remarked that Cyrus "investigates thoughts of womanliness with an evil, decided edge" by taking on the situation of the "other lady" referenced in "Before He Cheats" via Carrie Underwood. Composing for "PopMatters", Evan Sawdey portrayed "4x4" as a "practically disposable squaredance of a club melody ... complete with some accordion work", and recommended that it was the most imaginative track from the record since it was "ludicrous, strange, and really perky in a manner by which these other "Bangerz" aren't." 

A scene of "MTV Unplugged" featuring Cyrus debuted through MTV on January 29, 2014; she played out an acoustic rendition of "4x4", among a few extra tracks from "Bangerz". The whole scene pursued a subject roused by down home music; amid "4x4" specifically, Cyrus was wearing red-checkered outfit with a blonde wig, white cap, and light blue satchel. She made a few provocative signals all through the execution, and furthermore twerked on entertainers wearing a substantial steed outfit. Soon thereafter, Cyrus played out the track amid her continuous Bangerz Tour. The execution got positive surveys from commentators. Blake Hannon lauded Cyrus' vocals and remarked that he adored "the knee-slapping, nation motivated 4X4." Cyrus came back to play out the tune amid the melodic celebration on June 21, 2014, Summertime Ball at Wembley Stadium of London, before 80,000 individuals. 

Credits adjusted from the liner notes of "Bangerz". 

"4x4" appeared at number 41 on the U.S. "Board" Pop Digital Songs diagram, and achieved number 64 on the Canadian "Announcement" Hot Digital Songs outline. The track likewise outlined at numbers 7 and 64 on the South Korean Gaon Chart and the Flanders Ultratip diagram in Belgium, separately.