Ebenezer Avery House 

The Ebenezer Avery House was initially situated on Latham Street and Thames Street in Groton, Connecticut, United States. The date of the house's development is obscure, yet it is accepted to be from the 1760s and it was the place of Ebenezer Avery. The Ebenezer Avery House was where the British brought the harmed fighters after the Battle of Groton Heights on September 6, 1781. In 1971, the house was moved to Fort Griswold Battlefield State Park in Groton and reestablished. Despite the fact that it remains in a state park, the notable house exhibition hall keeps on being kept up by the Avery Memorial Association. 

Built around the 1760s, the Ebenezer Avery House is a 10-room house was claimed by Ensign Ebenezer Avery. It was initially situated on Latham Street and Thames Street in Groton, Connecticut. Avery was a tailor that addressed the call for the fight to come on September 6, 1781 and went to guard of Fort Griswold from British assault. The Battle of Groton Heights finished with the American annihilation and the passings of its pioneer, Lieutenant Colonel William Ledyard and brought about almost 100 families being left destitute and a great part of the town's waterfront. 

Some portion of the Ebenezer Avery House history is the means by which it came to be utilized after the fight while its proprietor was missing. A portion of the injured from the fight, those unfit to walk, including Stephen Hempstead, were taken prisoner and put on a wagon with others to be brought down to the armada. The British men enabled the wagon to rundown the slope, where it halted when it struck a tree, losing a portion of the men the wagon and bothered their wounds. 

The injured were set upon the shoreline in anticipation of the vessel trek to New York, yet Ebenezer Ledyard, the sibling of William Ledyard, offered himself as prisoner. The British took the injured to Ebenezer Avery's home and put Ebenezer Avery and other injured inside and had them "parolled". The house was later determined to flame with the men inside and "with trouble stifled". In the fight, Avery was shot in the neck "which cut the lines, and left him silly as one of the dead." Hempstead said that thirty-five men had been laid upon the floor and the British left them, unattended and revealed, until Dr. Killjoy and Dr. Prentiss arrived. Ebenezer Avery recouped, however lost his hearing, and kept on living in the house until his demise on January 11, 1828 at age 81. The blood stains were as yet noticeable at the season of the centennial of the fight in 1881, yet never again are available. In 1896, the Thomas Starr Society set a commemoration tablet on the site. 

In 1970, the Ebenezer Avery House was in threat of being torn down to develop lofts and it was bought by R. Stanton Avery. R. Stanton Avery obtained the property with the goal of turning it over to the Avery Memorial Association. Edwin Park, a designer, evaluated the house as needing broad reproduction and the affiliation talked about the arrangement to move the house to Fort Griswold Battlefield State Park. A gathering hung on the relationship on July 24, 1971, was held to talk about the development plan which included dismantling and reassembling the house at its new area. The task to move the house was a mutual expense between R. Stanton Avery and the Avery Memorial Association. By the 1972 gathering, the complete expense of the migration was $43,000 and the demonstration incited enthusiasm from the State of Connecticut. The house was given to the State of Connecticut for use as a memorable house historical center. 

In 1973, the affiliation bantered over the clearance of land to take care of expenses of reestablishing and keeping up the Ebenezer Avery House. The all out expense of the move was recorded at $80,000 with a normal $3000 every year and the goal was to serve have enough salary produced by enthusiasm to take care of the expense of the house. The Association claimed 1.3 sections of land, yet would save the .3 section of land whereupon the Avery Monument is found. In May 1975, the Ebenezer Avery House was opened subsequent to being reestablished to its "unique condition" and loaded up with period things including Lieutenant Ebenezer Avery's sword, a cousin of Ensign Ebenezer Avery, murdered in the Battle of Groton Heights. As per Leary, blocks from the Fitz-John Winthrop house, situated in Bluff Point State Park were recovered and used to remake the stack of the Ebenezer Avery House. Fitz-John Winthrop's home was a sixteen room manor that fell into dilapidation before being crushed by a flame in 1962. 

Starting at 2014, the Ebenezer Avery House is opened from Memorial Day weekend through Labor Day weekend from 12:00â p.m. to 4:00â p.m. on Fridays, Saturdays and Sundays.