Jocelin of Wells 

Jocelin of Wells (kicked the bucket 19 November 1242) was a medieval Bishop of Bath (and Glastonbury). He was the sibling of Hugh de Wells, who progressed toward becoming Bishop of Lincoln. Jocelin turned into a standard of Wells Cathedral before 1200, and was chosen diocesan in 1206. Amid King John of England's debate with Pope Innocent III, Jocelin at first stayed with the lord, yet after the banishment of John in late 1209, Jocelin went into outcast. He came back to England in 1213, and was referenced in Magna Carta in 1215. 

Jocelin was one of the clerics that delegated John's child Henry III, and all through a mind-blowing remainder was engaged with regal organization. He was likewise dynamic in his ward, requesting development on the house of God at Wells, and issuing rules for his diocesan pastorate. Amid his time as diocesan, he settled a debate between his see and Glastonbury Abbey that had begun amid the church district of his ancestor. The dedication metal on his tomb in Wells Cathedral is likely one of the soonest in England. 

Jocelin conceived in Wells in Somerset, and was the child of Edward of Wells, a little landowner in the city of Wells. His sibling Hugh de Wells, was archdeacon of Wells and Bishop of Lincoln. A few students of history state that another relative, in spite of the fact that the definite relationship is obscure, was Simon of Wells, who progressed toward becoming Bishop of Chichester in 1207, however different antiquarians question this. The name Jocelin Trotman or Thotman, by which he was once in a while known by some cutting edge antiquarians, just dates from the "Margam Annals", and isn't contemporary with his life. 

Jocelin was a regal justiciar in 1203, just as the overseer of the empty bishopric of Lincoln. He was a regal assistant just as a standard of Wells, turning into a group and a minister by 1200. The past religious administrator of Wells kicked the bucket in 1205, and on 3 February 1206, Jocelin was chosen cleric. He was blessed on 28 May 1206, at Reading by Bishop William of Sainte-Mă¨re-Eglise of London. It is hazy if the house of prayer parts of Bath and of Wells made the move without anyone else, or if King John was the main impetus behind the race. 

Jocelin was one of the principle counselors of King John amid the question with the pope over Stephen Langton's arrangement to the Archbishopric of Canterbury. Jocelin did not quickly leave England after Pope Innocent III put a prohibit on England. Jocelin urged John to settle with Innocent in mid 1209, stressed that Innocent would extend the prohibit into an expulsion, compelling John's guides to pick between serving the ruler or complying with the pope. Nothing happened to the arrangements, be that as it may. Jocelin left England when John was banned in late 1209. Jocelin, alongside Gilbert Glanvill, the Bishop of Rochester, was the subject of a taunting tune on his direct amid the prohibit. 

Jocelin and Hugh were in a state of banishment together in Bordeaux in 1212, yet the two of them came back to England in May 1213, alongside the other English diocesans. Jocelin was one of the diocesans in August 1214 who would not pay a scutage to the lord. In 1215, Jocelin favored Stephen Langton and the nobles, and Magna Charta records Jocelin as one of the ruler's councilors. 

Jocelin and Peter des Roches, the Bishop of Winchester, blessed and delegated King Henry III, the youthful child of John, after John's passing. Afterward, Jocelin was available at the fight with Eustace the Monk in 1217, which verified Henry's standard. Jocelin bolstered Hubert de Burgh's work of shooting French powers from England and recapturing control of imperial strongholds seized by Falkes de Breautăš and different noblemen. In 1218, Jocelin was one of the vagrant justiciars for southwestern England. 

In 1218 and 1219, Jocelin likewise finished the debate between his ward and Glastonbury Abbey. Jocelin surrendered any case to control of the monastery, and the nunnery gave the ministerial office various bequests. Already, the religious administrators, as a component of their endeavor to annexe Glastonbury to their priestly district, had been known as the Bishop of Bath and Glastonbury. They additionally had held the workplace of abbot. In 1218, as a major aspect of the settlement, another abbot was chosen at Glastonbury. The papacy had never recognized Jocelin's guaranteeing of the title of abbot. The history specialist J. A. Robinson felt that as a major aspect of the settlement, Jocelin started to utilize the title Bishop of Bath and Wells, yet another student of history, David Knowles, oppose this idea. 

After 1223, Jocelin was a nobleman of the exchequer. In 1225 he served the lord as head of one of the collectors of the assessment of a fifteenth. After the rejection of Walter Mauclerk as treasurer, at first Jocelin, alongside Richard Poore, the Bishop of Durham, took over a large number of the treasurers capacities, yet this did not keep going long, and after 1233, Jocelin never again was included with budgetary undertakings. He once in a while saw contracts, be that as it may. After the fall of Peter des Roches in April 1234, Jocelin was given control of the Wardrobe. After this, he seems less consistently in regal government, however he witnessed the reconfirmation of Magna Carta in 1237. 

With his sibling Hugh, Jocelin established St. John's Hospital at Wells. Jocelin proclaimed a lot of constitutions for the see, requested that his diocesan church dwell in their benefices, and gave land and salary to the house of God school. Glastonbury Abbey griped of Jocelin that he looted terrains of the nunnery. Jocelin was additionally engaged with interceding between William de Blois, the Bishop of Worcester, and Tewkesbury Abbey over William's rights over the convent. Jocelin at last settled the question in 1232. 

Jocelin supported the structure of Wells Cathedral, started at the east end in the Early English Gothic style under Reginald Fitz Jocelin. The nave was finished, the west front started. The new house of God was sanctified on 23 October 1239 by Jocelin. Other development work attempted by Jocelin incorporated the groups and cleric's castle at Wells, and a home at Wookey. 

Jocelin kicked the bucket on 19 November 1242 at Wells and was covered in the choir of Wells Cathedral. He may have been the dad of Nicholas of Wells. The dedication metal on his tomb is supposedly one of the most punctual brasses in England. He utilized the medieval planner Elias of Dereham as a family official.