1953 FA Charity Shield 

The 1953 Football Association Charity Shield was the 29th FA Charity Shield, a yearly football coordinate played between the champs of the past season's Football League First Division and FA Cup rivalries. It was held at Highbury Stadium on 12 October 1953. The amusement was played between Arsenal, heroes of the 1952–53 Football League and Blackpool, who had beaten Bolton Wanderers to win the 1953 FA Cup Final. This was Blackpool's first FA Charity Shield appearance to Arsenal's ninth. 

In the match, Blackpool began firmly and scored first with Stan Mortensen's objective in the 30th moment. Against the keep running of play, be that as it may, Arsenal leveled through Tommy Lawton and in the second half they proceeded when Doug Lishman responded first to a bounced back shot. Lishman scored his second of the match in the 80th moment, which fixed a seventh Charity Shield respect for Arsenal. 

The FA Charity Shield was established in 1908 as a successor to the Sheriff of London Charity Shield. It was a challenge between the individual bosses of the Football League and Southern League, and after that by 1913 groups of beginner and expert players. In 1921, it was played by the Football League champions and FA Cup victors out of the blue. 

Munititions stockpile fit the bill for the 1953 FA Charity Shield as heroes of the 1952–53 Football League First Division. The other Charity Shield place went to Blackpool who won the 1952–53 FA Cup. The last of the challenge, which set Blackpool against Bolton Wanderers, was best associated with Stanley Matthews' execution, and later related by his name. The 1953 Shield denoted Blackpool's first appearance in the yearly challenge. On the other hand, this was Arsenal's ninth Charity Shield appearance; before the amusement they had won six Shields (1930, 1931, 1933, 1934, 1938 and 1948), and lost two (1935 and 1936). 

Weapons store declared their group two days before the match, reviewing Cliff Holton who had recuperated from damage. Blackpool wouldn't uncover their group until the night of 12 October, however supervisor Joe Smith confirmed to the press that Matthews would begin. 

On a foggy, floodlit night at Highbury, it was the guests who commanded the early procedures; "The Times" football journalist surveying that Blackpool's forward line had "‶flowed sweetly, the ball on the ground in the most dazzling ["sic"], clearing developments." Matthews was at the core of their best moves and, specifically, one go through the Arsenal guard sent Bill Perry clear on objective. He stumbled over the approaching Arsenal goalkeeper Jack Kelsey, however immediately figured out how to get up. With Kelsey out of his line, Perry was given the opportunity to score, however his shot hit the post. Blackpool kept on making shots and proceeded following 30 minutes of play. Breaking forward with the ball from the midway line, Matthews joined with his colleague Ernie Taylor, which finished in Stan Mortensen showing signs of improvement of his marker and shooting past Kelsey. 

In spite of Blackpool's strength, Arsenal figured out how to level seconds before half-time. From the left wing, Holton showed signs of improvement of his adversary Eddie Shimwell by taking the ball off him, and continued to cross; the ball discovered Tommy Lawton who scored from the byline. When play continued in the second half, Blackpool attempted to replicate a similar sort of power that had justified their before lead. Arms stockpile directed play the more drawn out the match went on, and looked progressively guaranteed in guard – "The Times" singled out Mercer’s developing impact, including "‶one saw the improvement of [Bill] Dodgin at focus half, and the high guarantee of youthful [Len] Wills, playing just his second amusement at appropriate back." 

Weapons store led the pack in the 65th moment when Jimmy Logie's pass was gathered by Holton. His shot at objective bounced back into the way of Doug Lishman, who was following up, and he scored. Ten minutes before the end, a cross by Don Roper into Blackpool’s punishment zone was going somewhere around Lawton; the ball came to Lishman who scored again to ensure Arsenal's success. 

The Shield was exhibited to Arsenal by Lord Alexander of Tunis, the Minister of Defense. Entryway receipts for the match totalled ³6,589. In his appraisal of the diversion, "The Manchester Guardian's" football reporter John Woodcock expressed: "The football was not by any means the only thing that had been of a high request. The sportsmanship and soul in which it was played had been all around as fine." Arsenal finished the season twelfth in the First Division, and achieved the fourth round of the FA Cup. Blackpool completed six positions higher in the alliance, however advanced no more distant than the fifth round of the glass rivalry.