Hasaan Ibn Ali 

Hasaan Ibn Ali (conceived William Henry Langford, Jr.; May 6, 1931 – 1980) was an American jazz musician and writer. 

Ibn Ali was unequivocally affected by Elmo Hope, and his playing was quick and serious, holding a feeling of beat notwithstanding when his style turned out to be progressively capricious. A few chronicles of his playing may exist, however one and only – "The Max Roach Trio Featuring the Legendary Hasaan" – has been discharged. Ibn Ali assembled a notoriety in Philadelphia, where he impacted artists including John Coltrane, yet he stayed minimal known somewhere else. 

Hasaan Ibn Ali was conceived William Henry Langford, Jr. in Philadelphia on May 6, 1931. His mom was a residential laborer. In 1946 (matured 15) he visited with trumpeter Joe Morris' cadence and blues band. In 1950 he played locally with Clifford Brown, Miles Davis, J. J. Johnson, Max Roach, and others. Situated in Philadelphia, Ibn Ali freelanced work and manufactured a notoriety locally as "a unique author and scholar", in musicologist Lewis Porter's words. The piano player played with Horace Arnold in New York City in 1959, and again in 1961–62, this time in a trio with Henry Grimes. 

As per Roach, on visits to New York, Ibn Ali went from club to club to play, and in some cases went to the drummer's home amidst the night to keep playing, alone, on the piano there. The drummer routinely recorded Ibn Ali's playing along these lines when the piano player visited. The Library of Congress has a 1964 chronicle of an Ibn Ali solo extemporization, recorded at Roach's home. John Murph in "JazzTimes" depicted it in 2014 as "Completely present day with an eccentric musical undertow and wayward melodic entries, it sounds like another Jason Moran creation." 

Ibn Ali remained a dark figure until his just discharged chronicle, "The Max Roach Trio Featuring the Legendary Hasaan", which was recorded on December 4 and 7, 1964, and discharged a half year later. The trio contained Roach and bassist Art Davis, and the collection comprised of seven tracks, all composed by Ibn Ali. The account opportunity was started by Roach, who utilized his impact with the proprietor of Atlantic Records to verify the session for Ibn Ali. Alan Sukoenig, in his liner notes to the collection, stated "For some time it gave the idea that it was Hasaan Ibn Ali's fate to be known – to the individuals who had known about him at all – as the phenomenal jazz piano player from Philadelphia who had never made a record." After the collection, Ibn Ali came back to haziness. 

As per music columnist Tom Moon, Ibn Ali was "Depicted by (generally tolerant) jazz performers as erratic or potentially unsteady". Saxophonist Odean Pope, who was guided by Ibn Ali, expressed that the piano player "was advanced to the point that performers shied far from him. [...] He was extremely devoted, earnest, yet in addition candid [...] If he were in a club, and the piano player wasn't making it, Hasaan would push him directly off the seat and begin playing himself." Pope likewise depicted the occasions that they rehearsed together, over a time of quite a long while, in the house that Ibn Ali lived in with his folks. Pope landed at the house toward the beginning of the day, and they played from 9:30 until 12:00, had a break for lunch and to play chess, at that point kept rehearsing until four or five o'clock. Ibn Ali at that point got dressed, having been in his wraparound, and they went out to play in the homes of individuals close-by, for "several dollars and some hot tea". 

Ibn Ali had further studio sessions, with Pope, Art Davis and drummer Khalil Madi, on August 23 and September 7, 1965. Notwithstanding, the ace tapes of the unreleased chronicles were said to have been annihilated in a flame at the record name's distribution center in 1976. Pope trusted that the chronicles were not discharged by Atlantic in light of the fact that the mark discovered that the piano player had been detained not long after the sessions. The saxophonist revealed in 2018 that the tapes had been found and their discharge was being considered. 

"Rash with his wellbeing, Hasaan passed on youthful", remarked author Geoffrey Haydon in 2002. 

"The New Grove Dictionary of Jazz" expresses that Ibn Ali kicked the bucket in Philadelphia in 1980 (matured 48 or 49). Ibn Ali's folks had been slaughtered in a flame that crushed their home at 2406 North Gratz Street on October 24 that year. He went to a diversion place for vagrants after the flame. 

A contemporary analyst for "The Glasgow Herald" remarked on Ibn Ali's playing on the Atlantic collection with Roach that "One's first response is wonder at the blasting finger procedure, [...] and the total uniqueness of his music [sic]". AllMusic commentator Scott Yanow depicted Ibn Ali's playing on the collection as "exceptional, to some degree virtuosic and cadenced, yet regularly melodic in an eccentric manner". 

Drummer Sherman Ferguson said of Ibn Ali, "he was a prime case of someone that was very cutting edge somehow or another, yet he was constantly melodic. So individuals of any age preferred his music, notwithstanding when he played out. [...He] had that thing, where he had a characteristic inclination. He got to the thing where it swung regardless of what he was doing." Saxophonist Benny Golson remarked that Ibn Ali "turned out to be talented at the cutting edge sounds, and afterward went directly past them into something extremely exclusive. He went a long distance. I surmise you could state his brakes didn't work." 

Jazz commentator Kenny Mathieson portrayed Ibn Ali as "An Elmo Hope assistant with a musical particularity that had him contrasted and [Thelonious] Monk and [Herbie] Nichols". Ibn Ali himself acknowledged Hope for being his primary motivation: "by gathering Mr Hope it resembled conversing with and having colleague with the riddle of music, who clarified not by the ruler or lip but rather with music. So from him I heard how to learn." 

Pope credits Ibn Ali with impacting saxophonist John Coltrane's sheets of sound methodology. Ibn Ali analyzed the potential outcomes of playing fourths, and of utilizing "harmony movements that moved by seconds or thirds rather than fifths, in playing an assortment of scales and arpeggios against each harmony" – includes later utilized widely in Coltrane's playing. A home account of Ibn Ali playing with Coltrane and others in 1952 may exist. 

Pope additionally remarked that "each imperative artist who left this zone [Philadelphia] in the sixties, including McCoy Tyner, gained from him."