Hapless (Lost) 

"Hapless" is the second scene of the second period of "Lost" and the 27th scene by and large. The scene was coordinated by Stephen Williams and composed by Steven Maeda and Leonard Dick. It initially circulated on September 28, 2005, on the American Broadcasting Company. In the scene, flashbacks portray Michael Dawson's battles for the guardianship of his child Walt Lloyd. The realtime occasions show Michael and Sawyer, who have quite recently had their pontoon decimated, getting to be unfriendly towards one another as they float back to shore, while Kate Austen and John Locke enter the puzzling and experience Desmond Hume. 

The storyline gets the pontoon storyline which was left hanging after season one's finale, "Mass migration", and furthermore returns to the occasions found in the past scene, "Man of Science, Man of Faith". Initially imagined as a Sawyer scene, the scene was reworked to concentrate on Michael. The ocean scenes were shot on the Hawaiian shoreline. "Hapless" had 23.17 million American watchers and stands as the second biggest crowd on the arrangement's run, however gotten negative surveys, which concentrated analysis on the flashbacks, the pontoon scenes, and the absence of plot headway. 

In the flashbacks, Michael Dawson (Harold Perrineau) battles with his ex Susan Lloyd (Tamara Taylor), who has requested that Michael transfer ownership of his fatherly rights to their child, Walt. In spite of the fact that Michael at first opposes, suing so as to keep his care, he inevitably yields as Susan convinces him to question his own inspirations and whether he is seeking after his very own wants or Walt's best advantages. 

After the pontoon was assaulted and crushed by the Others, Sawyer (Josh Holloway) surfaces in the sea. Michael is heard shouting for Walt over and over, and Sawyer shouts for Jin-Soo Kwon (Daniel Dae Kim). Sawyer chooses to save Michael first, and swims over to him, hauling him onto a bit of junk and doing mouth to mouth. Michael at that point awakens, and reprimands Sawyer for making him fire the flare, attracting their aggressors to them. Soon after, the two notice a shark is circling them; Michael trusts the shark was pulled in to Sawyer's draining injury, and the two have consistent contentions. 

Back at camp, after Kate Austen (Evangeline Lilly) vanishes into the bring forth, John Locke (Terry O'Quinn) drops too, and discovers her oblivious in the PC room. An outfitted Desmond (Henry Ian Cusick) strolls up behind them, and inquires as to whether he is "him". Locke at first professes to be the individual whom Desmond is looking for, however neglects to effectively answer a puzzle he presents. This disappointment prompts Desmond to round up the two and requests Kate to tie up Locke. In any case, Locke persuades Desmond that Kate be tied up. Desmond concurs, and Locke slides her a blade before securing her a dim room. Kate liberates herself and discovers she is in an extensive storeroom loaded up with foodstuffs, all in boxes bearing an abnormal checking. Kate then trips into a ventilation shaft. 

The plotline unites to a similar point toward the finish of the past scene, "Man of Science, Man of Faith". A caution klaxon starts to sound. Desmond strolls Locke at gunpoint to the work station, and powers him to enter "the numbers" into the PC, which resets a 108 moment clock. Before long, Desmond identifies Jack Shephard (Matthew Fox), and in the wake of diverting him to the PC room, powers Locke to welcome Jack as found in the past scene. 

Back at the pontoon, Michael and Sawyer see one of the pontoon's boats, and they choose to board it. Sawyer swims to the boat, giving Michael his firearm in the event that the shark shows up. When it does, Michael fires a few times, clearly harming the shark. Michael at that point joins Sawyer on the barge, and when the morning breaks, he cries, understanding that he ought not have carried Walt with him on the pontoon, and censures himself for his child's grabbing. Now, Sawyer sees that they are back close to the island. When they wash shorewards, they meet Jin running toward them, hands bound behind his back, yelling "Others", and escaping a gathering holding him hostage. 

Season one's last scene completes with two cliffhangers, the opening of the incubate and the assault of the Others on Michael's pontoon. At the point when generation of season 2 began, the journalists chose that season debut "Man of Science, Man of Faith" would concentrate on the incubate, leaving the pontoon for the second scene. To abstain from swelling the primary scene, a portion of the incubate storylines, for example, Locke's invasion, were left to be uncovered in "Hapless". The scene was initially going to be Sawyer driven, and was to highlight performing artist Jolene Blalock as a visitor, however this was revamped "at the notorious a minute ago" and changed to a Michael-driven scene. 

Chief Stephen Williams portrayed taping at the ocean as trying, since the waves caused cameras, lighting and the view where the on-screen characters were remaining to be "moving out of match up with each other". Williams anyway believed that the scenes turned out to be increasingly practical because of the area. The amphibian scenes took three evenings to finish, and Harold Perrineau got swimming exercises in arrangement. At the point when Sawyer is preparing to swim to the next stage, a shark swims past, and in a submerged shot a DHARMA Initiative emblem can quickly be seen close to its back blade. This was an inside joke or "easter egg," which ended up being more unmistakable than had been proposed. While a mechanical shark which required three puppeteers was manufactured, the shot of Michael being assaulted was finished with a shark blade being held by a submerged group part. 

23.17 million American watchers tuned into "Afloat", making it the second most-watched scene in the show's history, behind the season opener. 

Audits were for the most part negative. Macintosh Slocum of Filmfodder.com said the flashback storyline "wasn't too fascinating". "Excitement Weekly"<nowiki>'</nowiki>s Jeff Jensen called the flashbacks "among the least fortunate and most awkwardly incorporated flashbacks we've seen up until now", as he didn't feel anything new was educated, and furthermore detested Michael's on-Island storyline, noticing he "got the feeling that the performers and chiefs weren't exactly certain what to make of these scenes". Jensen anyway complimented the Hatch scenes, taking into account that Terry O'Quinn's execution and his communication with Henry Ian Cusick were "rescuing the main fair scene of the period". Ryan Mcgee of Zap2it suspected that noteworthy the Hatch occasions through alternate points of view a "new account approach", however grumbled about the absence of plot progression, and considered the pontoon storyline "multiple times insofar as required, with a truly phony shark assault for sure". IGN's Chris Carabott gave the scene a 8.2 out of 10, commending Perrineau's execution and the flashback, however the site later positioned "Afloat" 80th out of the 115 "Lost" scenes, facetiously saying that the shark ought to have eaten Michael "and spare us a great deal of 'Waaaaaalt!' and 'They took him. From my hands!' yell fests". A comparable rundown by "Los Angeles Times" positioned the scene as the fourth most exceedingly bad of the arrangement, depicting it as "exhausting". "New York" magazine recorded "Afloat" in its "Twenty Most Pointless Episodes of "Lost"", griping about "granulating the story to an end" and the "trudging" flashback, and saying that the scene would have been improved if Sawyer and Michael achieved land quicker.