Mein Herze schwimmt im Blut, BWV 199 

Johann Sebastian Bach created the congregation cantata (My heart swims in blood) 199 in Weimar somewhere in the range of 1711 and 1714, and performed it on the eleventh Sunday after Trinity, 12 August 1714. It is a performance cantata for soprano. 

The content was composed by Georg Christian Lehms and distributed in Darmstadt in 1711 in the gathering , on the general subject of recovery. The librettist composed a progression of substituting recitatives and arias, and included as the 6th development (of eight) the third stanza of Johann Heermann's song "". It isn't realized when Bach created the work, however he performed it as a component of his month to month cantata preparations on the eleventh Sunday after Trinity, 12 August 1714. The performance voice is joined by a Baroque instrumental troupe of oboe, strings and continuo. The artist communicates in a style like Baroque musical drama the emotional improvement from feeling like a "beast in God's eyes" to being pardoned. Bach modified the work for later exhibitions, prompting three distinct versions in the "Neue Bach-Ausgabe". 

On 2 March 1714 Bach was selected concertmaster of the Weimar court symphony ("Kapelle") of the co-ruling dukes Wilhelm Ernst and Ernst August of Saxe-Weimar. As concertmaster, he accepted the key accountability for creating new works, explicitly cantatas for the "Schlosskirche" (castle church), on a month to month plan. He played out the cantata on the Eleventh Sunday after Trinity as the fifth cantata of the arrangement, following . The recommended readings for the Sunday were from the First Epistle to the Corinthians, on the good news of Christ and his (Paul's) obligation as a witness (), and from the Gospel of Luke, the illustration of the Pharisee and the Tax Collector (). 

The content, which concerns a delinquent chasing and discovering recovery, was composed by Georg Christian Lehms. Lehms was situated in Darmstadt, and it isn't realized whether Bach knew him by and by, yet he may well have approached Lehms' 1711 distribution , which incorporates this content and that of another performance cantata, "Widerstehe doch der Săźnde", BWV 54, played out the prior month. The third stanza of Johann Heermann's song "" is coordinated as the sixths development. The content in the primary individual demonstrates the emotional difference in an individual at first inclination as "a beast in God's eyes" to at long last inclination acknowledged as God's youngster. The cantata content was set to music in 1712 by Christoph Graupner in Darmstadt. It isn't known whether Bach knew about Graupner's arrangement. The content has no particular connection to the recommended readings, in this manner it is conceivable that Bach may have officially formed the work before his advancement to show ace with ordinary Sunday administrations, similar to the next cantata on a content by Lehms. 

Bach originally played out the cantata on 12 August 1714. When he performed it again in Leipzig on the eleventh Sunday after Trinity in 1723 (8 August) it was the primary solo cantata and the most operatic work which he had introduced to the assemblage up to that point. He made amendments for that execution, for example, transposing it from C minor to D minor and changing the obbligato viola to violoncello piccolo. In a similar administration, he additionally played out another work, : one preceding and one after the lesson. 

The "Neue Bach-Ausgabe" perceives three particular forms: the Weimar form, a Kăśthen variant, and the Leipzig rendition. 

The cantata, organized in eight developments, is scored as ambiance music for a performance soprano voice (S), and a Baroque instrumental troupe of oboe (Ob), violins (Vl), viola (Va), and basso continuo (Bc) including bassoon (Fg) and violone (Vo). In the Weimar variant, it is in C minor, with a viola as the obbligato instrument in development 6. The cover sheet of the parts for this variant peruses: "Geistliche Cantate/Mein Herze schwimt im Blut/Ă˘/Soprano solo/1 Hautb. /2 Viol. /Viola/e/Basso/di/J.S.Bach". In the Leipzig form, it is in D minor, with an obbligato violoncello piccolo rather than the viola. 

In the accompanying table of the developments, the scoring pursues the Neue Bach-Ausgabe. The keys and time marks are taken from Alfred Dăźrr, utilizing the image for basic time (4/4). The continuo, playing all through, isn't appeared. 

Albeit constrained to one soprano voice, Bach accomplishes an assortment of melodic articulation in the eight developments. Everything except one recitative are joined by the strings (accompagnato), and just development 5 is secco, joined by the continuo as it were. The performance voice is blessed to receive emotional declamation, near contemporary musical drama. 

A recitative sets the scene, "" ("My heart swims in blood"). 

The musicologist Julian Mincham clarifies that it "dribbles with oneself fixated miseries of wrongdoing, torment and deserting ... with the torment of a deserted soul overwhelmed by its very own transgression and distress. Its finely fashioned shapes depict significantly the swaying feelings running from repulsiveness and dread to desolate and disheartened renunciation." 

The primary aria, a da capo aria, "" (Mute murmurs, quiet cries), is joined by the oboe. The topic of the ritornello is available all through the development. The center segment starts with a cacophony to stretch the dismal picture of "" ("And you, clammy springs of tears"). It closes with an entry set as a secco recitative, portrayed by Mincham: "Time nearly seems to stop with this last articulation of hopelessness". 

The accompanying recitative, "" ("But God must be benevolent to me"), finishes in an announcement of apology. 

The second aria, "" ("Deeply bowed and loaded up with lament"), is ruled by rich string sound. An adagio section prompts the da capo. The aria communicates contrition in an "enlightened and refined minuet". 

A short secco recitative, "" ("Upon this difficult contrition"), presents the accompanying song stanza. It starts with "a melodic reverberation of the torments of the heart swimming in blood". 

The main chorale stanza of the work is "" ("I, Your harried tyke"), the third stanza of Johann Heermann's "" ("Where should I escape"), distributed in 1630. Its term "vexed youngster" is a decent synopsis of the situation of the person in connection to God. The wording of its decision, "In deine tiefen Wunden, da ich stets Heil gefunden" ("into Your profound injuries, where I have constantly discovered salvation") prompts the accompanying recitative. The voice is joined by an obbligato viola (violoncello piccolo in the Leipzig variant) in an energetic figuration. 

Bach utilized a somewhat bizarre song by Caspar von Stieler, though he put together his later chorale cantata with respect to this psalm on the tune by Jacob Regnart. The song is treated as in a chorale rhapsody, with string ritornellos between the sections. 

The last recitative, "" ("I lay myself on these injuries"), presents an alternate state of mind; the last measures are a "taking off melisma", a "cheerfully inspiring prelude" to the last development. 

The last aria, "" ("How upbeat is my heart"), communicates bliss as a sprightly gigue, with a long coloratura on "" (happy). It is practically identical to the gigues in Bach's French Suites. Mincham finishes up: 

The work has been recorded regularly, both by Bach experts and others. The posting is taken from the determination on the Bach Cantatas Website, which records 58 accounts . Troupes playing on period instruments in generally educated execution are set apart by green foundation.