Acquacotta 

Acquacotta (; Italian for "cooked water") is a hot juices based bread soup in Italian cooking that was initially a laborer sustenance. Its planning and utilization goes back to antiquated history, and it began in the waterfront territory known as the Maremma in southern Tuscany and northern Lazio. The dish was concocted to some degree as a way to make solidified, stale bread consumable. In contemporary occasions, fixings can shift, and extra fixings are now and again utilized. Varieties of the dish incorporate "Aquacotta con funghi" and "Aquacotta con peperoni". 

Acquacotta is a basic conventional dish beginning in the waterfront locale of Italy known as Maremma, which traverses the southern portion of Tuscany's coast and keeps running into northern Lazio. "Acquacotta" signifies "cooked water" in the Italian language. It was initially a worker nourishment, and has been depicted as an old dish, the formula of which was determined to a limited extent by individuals who lived in the Tuscan woods filling in as colliers (charcoal burners), who were normally extremely poor, being "generally among the least fortunate of individuals". It was likewise arranged and devoured by ranchers and shepherds in the Maremma zone. Generally, the soup was now and then filled in as an appetizer dish, the main course in an Italian feast. It remains a prevalent dish in Maremma and all through Italy. 

Acquacotta was imagined to a limited extent as a way to make stale, solidified bread consumable. Individuals that worked far from home for huge timeframes, for example, woodcutters and shepherds, would carry bread and different nourishments with them, (for example, pancetta and salt cod) to hold them over. Acquacotta was arranged and used to marinate the stale bread, along these lines mellowing it. 

A legend about acquacotta exists in connection to the idea of stone soup, which is commonly founded on a reason of a poor voyager who landed at a town having just a stone, yet persuaded the townspeople to add fixings to his stone soup, making acquacotta; varieties of the legend exist. 

Truly, acquacotta's essential fixings were water, stale bread, onion, tomato and olive oil, alongside different vegetables and remaining nourishments that may have been accessible. In the prior 1800s, a few arrangements utilized "agresto", a juice got from half-aged grapes, instead of tomatoes, which were not a typical sustenance in Italy preceding "the last many years of the nineteenth century". 

Contemporary arrangements of acquacotta may utilize stale, crisp, or toasted bread, and can incorporate extra fixings, for example, vegetable soup, eggs, cheeses, for example, Parmigiano-Reggiano and Pecorino Toscano, celery, garlic, basil, beans, for example, cannellini beans, cabbage, kale, lemon juice, salt, pepper, potatoes and others. A few renditions may utilize consumable mushrooms, for example, porcini, wild herbs, and leaf vegetables/greens, for example, arugula, endive, mint, chard, chicory, dandelion greens, watercress, valerian and others. As the greens come down, they add to the stock's flavor. The dish might be finished with a poached egg. Contemporary adaptations might be set up ahead of time from a couple of hours to multi day, put away in a virus place or refrigerated, and afterward warmed before serving. It can likewise be protected by solidifying. 

"Acquacotta con funghi" is an aquacotta soup variety that utilizes porcini mushrooms as an essential fixing. Extra fixings incorporate bread, stock or water, tomato "conserva", Parmesan cheddar, eggs, "mentuccia", wild mint, garlic, olive oil, salt and pepper. This present variety's flavor and smell has been portrayed as dependent on the porcini mushrooms that are utilized; parsley may likewise be utilized. 

"Acquacotta con peperoni" is an aquacotta soup variety that incorporates celery, red pepper and garlic.