Georgian contents 

The Georgian contents are the three composition frameworks used to compose the Georgian language: Asomtavruli, Nuskhuri and Mkhedruli. In spite of the fact that the frameworks vary in appearance, every one of the three are unicase, their letters share similar names and in sequential order request, and are composed on a level plane from left to right. Of the three contents, Mkhedruli, when the non military personnel imperial content of the Kingdom of Georgia and for the most part utilized for the illustrious sanctions, is currently the standard content for present day Georgian and its related Kartvelian dialects, while Asomtavruli and Nuskhuri are utilized just by the Georgian Orthodox Church, in stately religious writings and iconography. 

Georgian contents are extraordinary in their appearance and their definite cause has never been built up; in any case, in carefully auxiliary terms, their in order request to a great extent relates to the Greek letters in order, except for letters indicating exceptionally Georgian sounds, which are assembled toward the end. Initially comprising of 38 letters, Georgian is by and by written in a 33 letter set, as five letters are out of date in that language. The quantity of Georgian letters utilized in other Kartvelian dialects shifts. Mingrelian utilizes 36: 33 that are present Georgian letters, one old Georgian letter, and two extra letters explicit to Mingrelian and Svan. Laz utilizes indistinguishable 33 current Georgian letters from Mingrelian in addition to that equivalent outdated letter and a letter acquired from Greek for an aggregate of 35. The fourth Kartvelian language, Svan, isn't regularly composed, however when it will be, it utilizes Georgian letters as used in Mingrelian, with an extra out of date Georgian letter and once in a while enhanced by diacritics for its numerous vowels. 

Georgian contents were allowed the national status of immaterial social legacy in Georgia in 2015 and engraved on the UNESCO Representative List of the Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity in 2016. 

The starting point of the Georgian content is ineffectively known, and no full understanding exists among Georgian and remote researchers as to its date of creation, who planned the content, and the fundamental effects on that procedure. 

The primary adaptation of the content authenticated is "Asomtavruli" which goes back at any rate to the fifth century; different contents were framed in the next hundreds of years. Most researchers interface the formation of the Georgian content to the procedure of Christianization of Iberia (not to be mistaken for the Iberian Peninsula), a center Georgian kingdom of Kartli. The letters in order was along these lines most presumably made between the change of Iberia under King Mirian III (326 or 337) and the Bir el Qutt engravings of 430, contemporaneously with the Armenian letter set. It was first utilized for interpretation of the Bible and other Christian writing into Georgian, by priests in Georgia and Palestine. Educator Levan Chilashvili's dating of divided "Asomtavruli" engravings, found by him at the destroyed town of Nekresi, in Georgia's easternmost region of Kakheti, during the 1980s, to the first or second century has not been acknowledged. 

A Georgian convention initially bore witness to in the medieval annal "Lives of the Kings of Kartli" (ca. 800), appoints an a lot prior, pre-Christian birthplace to the Georgian letters in order, and names King Pharnavaz I (third century BC) as its creator. This record is presently viewed as unbelievable, and is dismissed by insightful accord, as no archeological affirmation has been found. Rapp believes the custom to be an endeavor by the Georgian Church to invalidate the prior convention that the letters in order was concocted by the Armenian researcher Mesrop Mashtots, and is a Georgian utilization of an Iranian model in which primordial lords are credited with the formation of essential social foundations. Georgian language specialist Tamaz Gamkrelidze offers a substitute understanding of the custom, in the pre-Christian utilization of remote contents (alloglottography in the Aramaic letters in order) to record Georgian writings. 

Another purpose of conflict among researchers is the pretended by Armenian priests in that procedure. As per medieval Armenian sources and various researchers, Mesrop Mashtots, for the most part recognized as the maker of the Armenian letters in order, likewise made the Georgian and Caucasian Albanian letters in order. This custom begins in progress of Koryun, a fifth-century antiquarian and biographer of Mashtots, and has been cited by Donald Rayfield and James R. Russell, however has been dismissed by Georgian grant and some Western researchers who judge the entry in Koryun untrustworthy or even a later interjection. In his examination on the historical backdrop of the creation of the Armenian letters in order and the life of Mashtots, the Armenian language specialist Hrachia Adjarian guarded Koryun as a dependable source and rejected reactions of his records on the innovation of the Georgian content by Mashtots. Some Western researchers quote Koryun's cases without taking a position on its legitimacy. Many concur, in any case, that Armenian ministers, if not Mashtots himself, more likely than not assumed a job in the production of the Georgian content. 

Another contention respects the principle impacts at play in the Georgian letters in order, as researchers have discussed whether it was roused more by the Greek letter set, or by Semitic letter sets, for example, Aramaic. Ongoing historiography centers around more prominent likenesses with the Greek letter set than in the other Caucasian composition frameworks, most quite the request and numeric estimation of letters. A few researchers have likewise proposed certain pre-Christian Georgian social images or family markers as a conceivable motivation for specific letters. 

Asomtavruli (; ) is the most seasoned Georgian content. The name "Asomtavruli" signifies "capital letters", from "aso" (აჱო) "letter" and "mtavari" (მთავარი) "chief/head". It is otherwise called Mrgvlovani () "adjusted", from "mrgvali" (მრგვალი) "round", so named due to its round letter shapes. Regardless of its name, this "capital" content is unicameral, much the same as the cutting edge Georgian content, Mkhedruli. 

The most established Asomtavruli engravings found so far date from the fifth century and are Bir el Qutt and the Bolnisi engravings. 

From the ninth century, Nuskhuri content beginning getting to be overwhelming, and the job of Asomtavruli was decreased. Be that as it may, epigraphic landmarks of the tenth to eighteenth hundreds of years kept on being written in Asomtavruli content. Asomtavruli in this later period turned out to be progressively enhancing. In most of ninth century Georgian original copies which were written in Nuskhuri content, Asomtavruli was utilized for titles and the primary letters of parts. Albeit, a few original copies composed totally in Asomtavruli can be found until the eleventh century. 

In early Asomtavruli, the letters are of equivalent tallness. Georgian history specialist and philologist Pavle Ingorokva trusts that the course of Asomtavruli, similar to that of Greek, was at first boustrophedon, however the bearing of the most punctual enduring writings is from left to one side. 

In most Asomtavruli letters, straight lines are level or vertical and meet at right points. The main letter with intense edges is (ჿ "jani"). There have been different endeavors to clarify this exemption. Georgian language specialist and craftsmanship student of history Helen Machavariani trusts "jani" gets from a monogram of Christ, made out of the (ი "ini") and (ჵ "kani"). As indicated by Georgian researcher Ramaz Pataridze, the cross-like state of letter "jani" shows the finish of the letters in order, and has a similar capacity as the comparably formed Phoenician letter taw (), Greek chi (Χ), and Latin X, however these letters don't have that work in Phoenician, Greek, or Latin. 

From the seventh century, the types of certain letters started to change. The equivalent tallness of the letters was relinquished, with letters obtaining ascenders and descenders. 

In Nuskhuri original copies, Asomtavruli are utilized for titles and enlightened capitals. The last were utilized at the beginnings of passages which began new segments of content. In the beginning periods of the improvement of Nuskhuri writings, Asomtavruli letters were not detailed and were recognized mainly by size and once in a while by being written in cinnabar ink. Afterward, from the tenth century, the letters were enlightened. The style of Asomtavruli capitals can be utilized to recognize the time of a content. For instance, in the Georgian original copies of the Byzantine time, when the styles of the Byzantine Empire affected Kingdom of Georgia, capitals were lit up with pictures of winged creatures and different creatures. 

From the eleventh century "appendage colorful", "appendage arrowy" and "appendage spotty" ornamental types of Asomtavruli are created. The initial two are found in eleventh and twelfth century landmarks, though the third one is utilized until the eighteenth century. 

Significance was joined additionally to the shade of the ink itself. 

Asomtavruli letter დ ("doni") is regularly composed with adornment impacts of fish and flying creatures. 

The "Wavy" ornamental type of Asomtavruli is additionally utilized where the letters are wattled or intermixed on one another, or the littler letters are composed inside different letters. It was for the most part utilized for the features of the compositions or the books, in spite of the fact that there are finished engravings which were written in the Asomtavruli "Wavy" structure as it were. 

The accompanying table demonstrates the stroke request and heading of each Asomtavruli letter: 

Nuskhuri (; ) is the second Georgian content. The name "nuskhuri" originates from "nuskha" (ნჳჱჾა), signifying "stock" or "calendar". Nuskhuri was before long enlarged with Asomtavruli lit up capitals in religious compositions. The mix is called Khutsuri (, "administrative", from "khutsesi" ( "minister"), and it was primarily utilized in hagiography. 

Nuskhuri first showed up in the ninth century as a realistic variation of Asomtavruli. The most established engraving is found in the Ateni Sioni Church and dates to 835 AD. The most seasoned enduring Nuskhuri original copies date to 864 AD. Nuskhuri ends up overwhelming over Asomtavruli from the tenth century. 

Nuskhuri letters shift in tallness, with ascenders and descenders, and are inclined to one side. Letters have a rakish shape, with a recognizable inclination to streamline the shapes they had in Asomtavruli. This empowered quicker composition of original copies. 

The accompanying table demonstrates the stroke request and bearing of each Nuskhuri letter: 

Asomtavruli is utilized seriously in iconography, wall paintings, and outside structure, particularly in stone inscriptions. Georgian language specialist Akaki Shanidze made an endeavor during the 1950s to bring Asomtavruli into the Mkhedruli content as capital letters to start sentences, as in the Latin content, however it didn't get on. Asomtavruli and Nuskhuri are formally utilized by the Georgian Orthodox Church nearby Mkhedruli. Patriarch Ilia II of Georgia approached individuals to utilize each of the three Georgian contents. 

Mkhedruli (; ) is the third and current Georgian content. Mkhedruli, actually signifying "mounted force" or "military", gets from "mkhedari" (მჾედარი) signifying "horseman", "knight", "warrior" and "high handed". 

Mkhedruli is bicameral, with capital letters that are called Mkhedruli Mtavruli () or just Mtavruli (; ). These days, Mtavruli is ordinarily utilized on the whole tops content in titles or to underline a word, however in the late nineteenth and mid twentieth hundreds of years it was at times utilized, as in Latin and Cyrillic contents, to underwrite formal people, places or things or the primary expression of a sentence. 

Mkhedruli first shows up in the tenth century. The most seasoned Mkhedruli engraving is found in Ateni Sioni Church going back to 982 AD. The second most established Mkhedruli-composed content is found in the eleventh century illustrious sanctions of King Bagrat IV of Georgia. Mkhedruli was generally utilized then in the Kingdom of Georgia for the illustrious sanctions, recorded archives, compositions and engravings. Mkhedruli was utilized for non-religious purposes just and spoke to the "common", "imperial" and "mainstream" content. 

Mkhedruli turned out to be increasingly more overwhelming over the two different contents, however Khutsuri (Nuskhuri with Asomtavruli) was utilized until the nineteenth century. Mkhedruli turned into the all inclusive composition Georgian framework outside of the Church in the nineteenth century with the foundation and improvement of printed Georgian text styles. 

Mkhedruli engravings of the tenth and eleventh hundreds of years are portrayed in adjusting of precise states of Nuskhuri letters and making the total frameworks in the majority of its letters. Mkhedruli letters are written in the four-direct framework, like Nuskhuri. 

Mkhedruli turns out to be progressively round and free recorded as a hard copy. It breaks the severe casing of the past two letter sets, Asomtavruli and Nuskhuri. Mkhedruli letters start to get coupled and all the more free calligraphy creates. 

The cutting edge Georgian letters in order comprises of 33 letters: 

The Society for the Spreading of Literacy among Georgians, established by Prince Ilia Chavchavadze in 1879, disposed of five letters from the Georgian letters in order that had turned out to be repetitive: 

Everything except ჵ ("cultivator") keep on being utilized in the Svan letters in order; ჲ ("hie") is utilized in the Mingrelian and Laz letter sets also, for the y-sound . A few others were utilized for Abkhaz and Ossetian in the brief timeframe they were written in Mkhedruli content. 

Mkhedruli has been adjusted to dialects other than Georgian. A portion of these letter sets held letters out of date in Georgian, while others required extra letters: 

The accompanying table demonstrates the stroke request and bearing of each Mkhedruli letter: 

ზ, ო, and ჾ ("zeni, oni, khani") are quite often composed without the little tick toward the end, while the manually written type of ჿ ("jani") regularly utilizes a vertical line, (now and then with a taller ascender, or with a corner to corner cross bar); notwithstanding when it is composed at a slanting, the cross-bar is commonly shorter than in print. 

There is individual and expressive variety in a large number of the letters. For instance, the top hover of ზ ("zeni") and the top stroke of რ ("rae") may go the other way than appeared in the diagram (that is, counter-clockwise beginning at 3 o'clock, and upwards – see the outer connection area for recordings of individuals composing). 

Other basic variations: 

A few letters are comparative and might be befuddled at first, particularly in penmanship. 

Asomtavruli is regularly exceedingly adapted and authors promptly framed ligatures, interlaced letters, and put letters inside letters or other such monograms. 

Nuskhuri, as Asomtavruli, is likewise regularly very adapted. Authors promptly shaped ligatures and shortenings for "nomina sacra", including diacritics called "karagma", which take after "titla". Since composing materials, for example, vellum were rare and in this manner valuable, condensing was a useful measure boundless in compositions and hagiography by the eleventh century. 

Mkhedruli, in the eleventh to seventeenth hundreds of years likewise came to utilize digraphs to the point that they were mandatory, expecting adherence to a mind boggling framework. 

Georgian contents come in just a solitary typeface, however word processors can apply programmed ("counterfeit") diagonal and strong designing to Georgian content. Generally, Asomtavruli was utilized for part or segment titles, where Latin content may utilize strong or italic sort. 

In Asomtavruli and Nuskhuri accentuation, different blends of dabs were utilized as word dividers and to isolate expressions, statements, and sections. In fantastic engravings and compositions of fifth to tenth hundreds of years, these were composed as dashes, as −, = and =−. In the tenth century, bunches of one (·), two (:), three (჻) and six (჻჻) dabs (later once in a while little circles) were acquainted by Ephrem Mtsire with show expanding breaks in the content. One dab showed a "minor stop" (apparently a basic word break), two spots checked or isolated "extraordinary words", three dabs for a "greater stop, (for example, the appositive name and title "the sovereign Alexander", underneath, or the title of the Gospel of Matthew, above), and six specks were to demonstrate the finish of the sentence. Beginning in the eleventh century, marks taking after the punctuation and comma came into utilization. A punctuation was utilized to stamp an interrogative word, and a comma showed up toward the finish of an interrogative sentence. From the twelfth century on, these were supplanted with the semicolon (the Greek question mark). In the eighteenth century, Patriarch Anton I of Georgia improved the framework once more, with commas, single spots, and twofold dabs used to check "total", "fragmented", and "last" sentences, individually. Generally, Georgian today utilizes the accentuation as in worldwide use of the Latin content. 

This table records the three contents in parallel segments, including the letters that are presently old in all letters in order (appeared with a blue foundation), old in Georgian yet at the same time utilized in different letter sets (green foundation), or extra letters in dialects other than Georgian (pink foundation). The "national" transliteration is the framework utilized by the Georgian government, while "Laz" is the Latin Laz letters in order utilized in Turkey. The table likewise demonstrates the conventional numeric estimations of the letters. 

<br> 

The main Georgian content was incorporated into Unicode Standard in October, 1991 with the arrival of form 1.0. In making the Georgian Unicode square, imperative jobs were played by German Jost Gippert, an etymologist of Kartvelian studies, and American-Irish language specialist and content encoder Michael Everson, who made the Georgian Unicode for the Macintosh frameworks. Huge commitments were additionally made by Anton Dumbadze and Irakli Garibashvili (not to be mixed up with the previous Prime Minister of Georgia Irakli Garibashvili). 

Georgian "Mkhedruli" content got an official status for being Georgia's internationalized space name content for (.გე). 

Mtavruli letters were included Unicode adaptation 11.0 in June 2018. They are capital letters with comparative letterforms to Mkhedruli, yet with descenders moved over the pattern, with a more extensive focal oval, and with the top somewhat higher than the ascender tallness. Prior to this expansion, text style makers included Mtavruli in different ways. A few text styles came in sets, of which one had lowercase letters and the other capitalized; some Unicode textual styles put Mtavruli letterforms in the Asomtavruli run (U+10A0-U+10CF) or in the Private Use Area, and some ASCII-based ones mapped them to the ASCII capital letters. 

Georgian characters are found in three Unicode squares. The principal square (U+10A0–U+10FF) is essentially called Georgian. Mkhedruli (present day Georgian) involves the U+10D0–U+10FF territory (appeared in the base portion of the primary table underneath) and Asomtavruli possesses the U+10A0–U+10CF territory (appeared in the top portion of a similar table). The second square is the Georgian Supplement (U+2D00–U+2D2F), and it contains Nuskhuri. Mtavruli capitals are incorporated into the Georgian Extended square (U+1C90–U+1CBF). 

Mtavruli is characterized as the capitalized, yet not title case, of Mkhedruli, and Asomtavruli as the capitalized and title instance of Nuskhuri. 

There is no non-Unicode character encoding for Georgian, which counteracts non-Unicode applications from having the capacity to help the Georgian content. 

The following is the standard Georgian-language console design, the conventional format of manual typewriters. 

Exhibition of Asomtavruli, Nuskhuri and Mkhedruli contents.