M9 half-track 

The M9 half-track was a half-track created by International Harvester in the United States amid World War II for loan rent supply to the Allies. It was intended to give a comparative vehicle to the M2 half-track vehicle. It had a similar body and undercarriage as the M5 half-track (additionally worked by International Harvester for loan rent) however had a similar stowage and radio fit as the M2 half-track. 

The M9 served for a lot of time. Three thousand five-hundred were delivered before the finish of World War II. It was utilized amid World War II, the Arab-Israeli War of 1948, the Korean War, the Suez Crisis, the Vietnam War, the Six-Day War, and the Yom Kippur War. It had been utilized by eleven distinct nations before the finish of its administration. 

The United States received half-tracks in substantial numbers as they could be fabricated all the more rapidly and efficiently by regular citizen vehicle makers than vehicles from the set up reinforced vehicle producers. The M2 half-track vehicle had first been proposed as a big guns tractor, but on the other hand was utilized for conveying the automatic rifle squads of shielded infantry regiments and for surveillance units until quicker and better-outfitted M8 Greyhound protected autos were accessible. 

So as to supply U.S. partners, significantly more generation was required than was conceivable through the organizations creating the M2 (and the bigger M3 half-track). Universal Harvester (IH) could create half-tracks, yet a few contrasts must be acknowledged because of various assembling techniques and segments. This prompted IH creating for loan rent the M5 half-track and M9 as reciprocals for the M3 and M2 separately. 

The M9 utilized indistinguishable case and mechanical parts from the M5. It was spread out to give comparative stowage, access to the radios from within, back entryways, and a platform automatic weapon mount similarly as with the M2. The M9A1 variation of the M9 coordinated the enhancements made to the M2, M3, and M5, changing to ring mount automatic rifle mount and three pintle assault rifle mounts. 

Similarly as with the M5, because of the absence of face-solidified shield, homogenous covering was utilized. Albeit thicker, it gave less insurance and could be infiltrated by reinforcement puncturing rifle shots from as opposed to . The defensive layer likewise made the vehicle heavier, however the execution was basically comparable. 

The M9 began creation in August 1942, at IH. The M9 and M9A1 were made all at once and 2,026 were delivered altogether. As per American military history specialist and barrier authority Steven Zaloga, 2,026 M9s and 1,407 M9A1s were delivered in 1943. 

The M9 was utilized in World War II, the Arab-Israeli War of 1948, the Korean War, the Suez Crisis, and numerous different clashes. The creation of M9s was rented to different nations, as most other IH half-tracks delivered in World War II. This M9A1 was rented to both the Soviet Union and the United Kingdom, with the last giving it to different nations in the British Commonwealth. 

The M9 was utilized by numerous nations however not the United States, as there was adequate M2 and M3 creation for U.S. needs. The UK rented some half-tracks to Free France and different governments in a state of banishment. The Soviet Union got them straightforwardly. Following World War II, the second-hand showcase was a wellspring of supply for certain nations, including Israel. M9 half-tracks were given by the U.S. under the Military Aid Program to the accompanying nations (with the exception of the People's Republic of China, which worked caught ones from the Republic of China amid the Chinese Civil War and got more from the Soviet Union thereafter):