Daddy's Double 

Daddy's Double is a 1910 American quiet short show created by the Thanhouser Film Corporation. The film centers around Hal, a young fellow, who proposes to Sue, his affection intrigue. Her dad catches and winds up irate before whisking his little girl away to an all inclusive school. Hal and Sue endeavor to steal away, however it is thwarted. Hal then gets a plan to camouflage himself as the dad and recover Sue. The arrangement works, however the dad follows in interest. He breaks into the wedding function at the parson's home and sees his twofold. He at that point giggles and favors of the marriage. The film was the fourth discharge by Thanhouser and it was met with positive audits by commentators. In 2007, an enduring print was discharged on DVD with another unique score created and performed by Raymond A. Brubacher. 

At the Post's home, Hal Dunton takes a seat with his adoration intrigue Sue Post, carefully verifying whether they are distant from everyone else. Hal then proposes to Sue and in the energy, her dad comes into the room. He is shocked and trusts his little girl is too youthful to be in any way hitched and immediately makes Hal leave before chiding his little girl. Before withdrawing, Hal meets and begs the dad as he removes the girl via vehicle. The dad cannot and Hal is thumped down before the dad and girl withdraw to a live-in school. The dad meets with the courtesan and leaves Sue in her consideration, a lot to Sue's pain. 

Whisked far from her home and her cherished, Sue is in despondency until Hal shows up outside her window with a stepping stool. The endeavored elopement falls flat when the fancy woman gets Hal in the demonstration and rejects him. She anticipates Sue to drop and round the corner before ending her and driving her back inside. The dad dismantles up to a position of business and Hal, who is strolling by, endeavors to welcome the dad. The furious dad disregards him, yet Hal turns and sees the wigmaker's store alongside him. A thought strikes him and he pays a picture taker to get a photograph of the dad in transit out, which further rankles him. Hal then makes an impression on Sue, that he will come and guarantee her the next day, masked as her dad. 

Hal head to the wigmaker and is veiled as the dad. So well is the camouflage that the dad's driver is persuaded and takes Hal to the life experience school. The dad rapidly exits so as to see his driver head out and hails a taxi. Hal touches base at the all inclusive school and the camouflage works, claims Sue and heads out. Seconds after the fact the dad arrives and goes up against the courtesan, withdrawing to seek after in an attack of outrage. Hal and Sue go to the parson's home to be quickly marry. The dad is deferred for a brief timeframe via vehicle inconvenience, however rapidly lands before the two are marry. He rushes in and sees his twofold and both he and Hal chuckle. The dad yields and affirms the marriage as Hal evacuates his mask before the dazed Parson. 

The situation was composed by Lloyd F. Lonergan. Lonergan was the essayist of every one of the three past preparations of the Thanhouser organization. Lonergan was an accomplished newspaperman still utilized by "The New York Evening World" while composing contents for the Thanhouser creations. He was the most vital content essayist for Thanhouser, averaging 200 contents per year from 1910 to 1915. The chief of the movie isn't known for certain, however two Thanhouser executives are conceivable. Barry O'Neil was the stage name of Thomas J. McCarthy, who might coordinate numerous essential Thanhouser pictures, including its initial two-reeler, "Romeo and Juliet". Lloyd B. Carleton was the stage name of Carleton B. Little, a chief who might remain with the Thanhouser Company for a brief span, moving to Biograph Company by the late spring of 1910. Film antiquarian Q. David Bowers does not trait either as the executive for this specific generation, however he credits Blair Smith as the cameraman. The film is made out of 28 shots, 8 titles and 1 embed. 

The cast for the film highlighted Thanhouser's first driving male performing artist, Frank H. Crane, alongside two phase on-screen characters, Isabelle Daintry and Fred Santley. Isabelle Daintry has one other known Thanhouser credit, however this imprints Fred Santley's solitary known credit. Amid this period, the players in the film were not credited and secrecy was the standard. 

The one reel dramatization, around 960 feet, was discharged on Tuesday April 5, 1910. The film would likewise be discharged in the United Kingdom on October 16, 1910. The enduring feel reel says the Gaumont Company of London (Gaumont British) had selective rights to Thanhouser films outside of the United States. The film was appeared over the United States, incorporating theaters in Kansas, New York, Pennsylvania, Texas, and Indiana. One of the last notices for the film came three years after its discharge by the Neosho Picture Show Company of Neosho, Missouri. 

The film got positive consideration from film pundits. "The Morning Telegraph" adulated it as the best work from the new Thanhouser Company. "The New York Dramatic Mirror" discovered it to have great acting which could at present be increasingly expressive, however was progressively not interested in the utilization of pointless interfacing scenes. "The Moving Picture World" expressed, in a concise survey, that the acting and photography was great. 

In 2007, the film was discharged by Thanhouser Company Film Preservation on a three-plate DVD set alongside eleven other enduring Thanhouser films. The enduring print was acquired from the British Film Institute and included another unique score made and performed by Raymond A. Brubacher. As per Silent Era, the file holds the 35mm nitrate positive, the more steady 35mm security negative and a 35mm reference positive.