Cupid at the Circus 

Cupid at the Circus is a 1910 American quiet short dramatization created by the Thanhouser Company. The film is a sentiment with a storyline centered around a nation kid who pursues a bazaar march to the carnival grounds and winds up goal on sneaking into the show. He is found, however before he can be shot out, a young lady requests that her dad get him a ticket of confirmation. Appreciative, the kid gives her his folding knife. A long time later the two meet again and when he sees her utilizing his folding knife. He proposes and she acknowledges. Not all that much is known for sure about the creation of this movie, including the author, executive and picture taker credits. The carnival scenes were finished with exceptional course of action by Barnum and Bailey. The film was discharged on May 20, 1910 to positive surveys. The film is assumed lost. 

In spite of the fact that the film is assumed lost, an enduring authority rundown was distributed in "The Moving Picture World". It states: "Tom Wilk is a poor nation fellow, living alone with his stepfather, who abuses him. Tom leaves his work one day to pursue a bazaar march. He is captivated with the marvels of the procession and tails it to the bazaar grounds, around which he remains throughout the morning, and is at long last enticed by his incredible wish to see the show, to slither under the tent. He is found by a bazaar watch, and requested off the ground. A little young lady, Lillie Lockwood, and her dad go to the carnival, and witness Tom's discharge. Encouraged by his little girl, Lillie's dad purchases Tom a ticket of confirmation, giving him his first cheerful day. Consequently, Tom gives Lillie, as a remembrance, his most cherished belonging, his folding knife. On returning home, Tom is seriously chastised by his progression father, after which he chooses to flee. He strolls to a neighboring town, and is there connected as an office kid by Gates, a legal counselor. After certain long stretches of reliable administration, in different limits, Tom turns into an individual from the firm. Lillie gets a situation as a stenographer in their office. She and Tom don't perceive one another, until Tom inadvertently finds in her grasp the little blade he had given her in the quite a while in the past. He pronounces he had adored her as the years progressed, and has been persistently sitting tight for her, so the sentiment that started at the carnival finds a cheerful peak at the raised area." 

The author of the situation is obscure, yet it might have been Lloyd Lonergan. Lonergan was an accomplished newspaperman still utilized by "The New York Evening World" while composing contents for the Thanhouser preparations. He was the most critical content author for Thanhouser, averaging 200 contents every year from 1910 to 1915. While the chief of the movie isn't known, two Thanhouser executives are conceivable. Barry O'Neil was the stage name of Thomas J. McCarthy, who might coordinate numerous vital Thanhouser pictures, including its initial two-reeler, "Romeo and Juliet". Lloyd B. Carleton was the stage name of Carleton B. Little, a chief who might remain with the Thanhouser Company for a brief span, moving to Biograph Company by the late spring of 1910. Arbors does not quality either as the executive for this specific generation nor does Bowers credit a cameraman. Blair Smith was the primary cameraman of the Thanhouser organization, however he was before long joined via Carl Louis Gregory who had long periods of experience as a still and movie picture taker. The job of the cameraman was uncredited in 1910 preparations. The two known credits in the film are for the main players, Anna Rosemond and Frank H. Crane. Rosemond was one of two driving women for the main year of the organization and participated in the fall of 1909. Crane was engaged with the very beginnings of the Thanhouser Company from 1909. Crane's was the primary driving man of the organization and acted in various creations before turning into a chief at Thanhouser. 

The setting of the film included Barnum and Bailey bazaar that were shot by a unique game plan with Mr. Barnum and Bailey. The date of the recording is obscure, yet the 1910 course of Barnum and Bailey's Greatest Show on Earth demonstrates that it the carnival was in New York between March 24 through April 30. The carnival was at Madison Square Garden from March 24 through April 22 and it moved to Brooklyn, New York for April 25 through April 30. The carnival would go to Philadelphia, Washington D. C., Baltimore, Maryland, and Wilmington, Delaware before moving back up through New Jersey on May 14 through May 18. As indicated by one survey in the "Santa Clause Cruz Sentinel", the film appeared "...the Barnum and Bailey carnival from the time they touch base at the parcel until after the show." 

The one reel film was discharged on Friday May 20, 1910. There are diverse records for the length of the reel. As indicated by Bowers, the film was 975 feet long, however one exchange distribution recorded it as being 940 feet long. The film was promoted in theaters in Kansas, Nebraska, Pennsylvania, Missouri, Minnesota, Indiana, and California. The film was discharged one day before the Barnum and Bailey tent burst into flames in Schenectady, New York. The May 21 fire did not result in damage or death toll, however was caused an expected $10,000 in harms, . 

The film was met with great audits from commentators. "The Morning Telegraph" offers general applause for the great photography and the well-recounted story. "The Nickelodeon" was similarly positive and started to mirror the acting, organizing and photography was up to the ordinary standard of the Thanhouser organization. "The New York Dramatic Mirror" offered extra remarks on the Thanhouser organization's higher benchmarks in their creations, however gave a generally positive survey that concentrated on the oddity of the bazaar scenes.