Two for the Road (Lost) 

"Two for the Road" is the twentieth scene of the second period of the American dramatization TV arrangement "Lost", and the show's 45th scene generally speaking. The scene was composed by administering maker Elizabeth Sarnoff and maker Christina M. Kim, and coordinated by Paul Edwards. It initially publicized in the United States on May 3, 2006, on the American Broadcasting Company. In the scene, flashbacks uncover progressively about Ana Lucia's past, while in present time, Ana Lucia attempts to get a firearm to kill Henry, and Michael comes back to the remainder of the survivors. 

"Two for the Road" was commonly generally welcomed by pundits who were stunned that Ana Lucia and Libby were slaughtered off. Numerous individuals, in any case, foreseen the two passings as performing artists Michelle Rodriguez and Cynthia Watros had broadly exposed flushed driving charges a while before the airing of the scene. The makers later asserted in a few meetings that the passings had been anticipated over a year. The scene was viewed by 15.03â million American watchers, which spoke to a reduction contrasted with the earlier year's evaluating. Sarnoff and Kim were assigned for the Writers Guild of America (WGA) Award for Best Episodic Drama at the February 2007 service for composing the scene. 

Flashbacks start legitimately after Ana Lucia Cortez (Michelle Rodriguez) shooting Jason (Aaron Gold) in "Impact". After landing at the police headquarters the next day, Ana Lucia's mom Teresa Cortez (Rachel Ticotin) is suspicious of her little girl and questions her, causing Ana Lucia to stop the police division. While working at an air terminal, she meets Christian Shephard (John Terry) who contracts her as a guardian for his outing to Australia. One night, Ana Lucia and an alcoholic Christian go to a home, where Christian requests to see his little girl from a blonde lady (Gabrielle Fitzpatrick). Subsequent to seeing that the contention is gaining out of power, Ana intercedes and maneuvers Christian over into the vehicle. Ana Lucia inevitably becomes weary of Christian's shenanigans and abandons him at a bar, where they quickly experience Sawyer when Christian opens his vehicle entryway. Ana goes to the air terminal and calls her mom, saying 'sorry' and disclosing to her that she wishes to make things right. Teresa says she will hang tight for Ana Lucia in Los Angeles. 

In the present, Ana Lucia begins addressing Henry Gale in the bring forth, yet abruptly he assaults her, and is possibly ceased when John Locke (Terry O'Quinn) thumps him oblivious. Locke asks Henry for what good reason he assaulted Ana Lucia, however has never attempted to harmed him. Henry says that Locke is "one of the great ones". In spite of the fact that Libby (Cynthia Watros) prompts Ana Lucia not to endeavor to get vengeance on Henry, she is resolved and asks James "Sawyer" Ford (Josh Holloway) for a firearm, however is rejected. Ana Lucia returns and after Sawyer still will not give her a weapon, she has intercourse with him, and can divert him sufficiently long to take the firearm. Jack Shephard (Matthew Fox) and Kate Austen (Evangeline Lilly) come back with Michael Dawson (Harold Perrineau). Michael awakens and tells everybody in the bring forth that he followed the Others down and discovered that they are living more regrettable off than the survivors. He additionally says that once he is sound, he will sort out a salvage mission to recover his child Walt Lloyd (Malcolm David Kelley). After Locke and Jack start to design a salvage mission for Walt, they understand that they need more firearms, and go to Sawyer, who understands that Ana Lucia has stolen his. Somewhere else, Hugo "Hurley" Reyes (Jorge Garcia) has arranged a sentimental cookout for himself and Libby, yet Hurley gets lost and leads them back to the survivors' shoreline. There, he understands that he neglected to pack a cover and Libby offers to return to the bring forth to recover one. She additionally recommends that Hurley approach Rose and Bernard for some wine for the cookout, a proposal that Hurley is pleased to hear. Then, back in the incubate, Michael asks Ana Lucia what is happening and she clarifies a couple of things: Sawyer has every one of the weapons, Jack, Locke, and Kate left to get the firearms, and they at present have one of the Others, Henry, in imprisonment inside the ordnance. She specifies that Henry attempted to kill her before in the day and that despite the fact that she was going to kill Henry, she was not ready to pull the trigger. Michael offers to do it, however after she gives him the weapon he pivots and shoots her dead. Libby strolls in with the covers and frightens Michael making him shoot her as well. Michael at that point strolls into the arsenal where Henry is being held. Rather than shooting Henry, Michael shoots himself in the arm. 

"Two for the Road" was the second scene of the arrangement coordinated by Paul Edwards. Edwards had recently coordinated the scene "What Kate Did". The scene was composed by Elizabeth Sarnoff and Christina M. Kim, the third scene that the two had composed together. 

Various areas on Oahu were utilized as shooting areas for the scene. The housetop on Dole Cannery was shot as the Los Angeles Police Department housetop. The kitchen of Hawaii Convention Center was modified so that the "Lost" cast and group could utilize it as a mortuary, the Convention Center was likewise utilized for the airplane terminal scenes. The bar that Christian Shephard went to in the flashbacks is really the Fisherman's Wharf eatery at Kewalo Basin Harbor. The scene at Ana Lucia's lodging was shot at the Renaissance Ilikai Waikiki Hotel. The scenes on the shoreline were shot at Oahu's Papa'iloa Beach of course. 

The passings of Ana Lucia and Libby caused theory that they were killed off because of the DUIs that on-screen characters Michelle Rodriguez and Cynthia Watros got inside fifteen minutes of one another on December 1, 2005. Watros conceded, was fined $370, and had her permit suspended for 90 days. Rodriguez at first argued blameless, yet in April confessed, and was condemned to five days in Oahu restorative office, yet wound up serving just 65 hours because of prison packing. In February 2006, "US Weekly" guaranteed that an insider revealed to them that the "Lost" makers were disappointed with Rodriguez's conduct and were going to slaughter her character off. Before long, "Two for the Road" disclosed, essayists Damon Lindelof and Carlton Cuse told "television Guide" that when conversing with Rodriguez about the piece of Ana Lucia, she said that she would be intrigued, yet just for a year. Subsequent to taking a seat with her, the two were extremely awed with her vitality, and chose to alter their arrangement to make her character just last one season. Since gatherings of people had a contrary response to Ana-Lucia, the makers figured her passing would not create enough compassion from fans, so they chose that Libby, who was very much preferred, ought to likewise be executed for enthusiastic effect. Lindelof reviewed that after they discovered that both Rodriguez and Watros got the DUIs, he was worried that it would look like executing Ana and Libby was the makers endeavor to state "Don't drive alcoholic!", and even considered re-composing the content so it wouldn't appear that way, however the makers chose just to keep it as was it. Lindelof likewise denied bits of gossip that Rodriguez was slaughtered off in light of the fact that she was difficult to manage, saying that Michelle was "absolutely proficient and coexisted well with the various performing artists." According to Lindelof and Cuse, Watros was exceptionally pitiful about Libby being murdered off, and the makers felt awful for her, so they helped her get in a pilot for a show on CBS called "My Ex-Life", in spite of the fact that it was not grabbed by the system. 

"Two for the Road" was seen by 15.03â million American watchers, which was 1.5â million less than the appraisals contrasted with the earlier year. The scene got commonly positive audits from commentators. Television Squad's C. K. Test composed that "Two for the Road" was "an incredible scene that I completely appreciated", despite the fact that he felt "seriously for Sawyer and Hugo". Test likewise composed that despite the fact that he presumed that Ana-Lucia and Libby were going to pass on, he thought what "was astounding was who shot them". Macintosh Slocum of Filmfodder.com composed that the scene contained the "Greatest ... contort ... ever." Slocum proceeded to state that in the event that you had not seen the scene, "whoooeee are you in for a treat", and called the two killings "a doozy". Slocum called Ana Lucia "a busybody". He likewise felt that Libby's passing was "a standout amongst the most grievous things we've seen", and said that it was "proportionate to an atomic weapon clearing out every one of the characters in the "M*A*S*H" finale. TV Without Pity reviewed the scene with a B+. Administering maker Elizabeth Sarnoff and maker Christina M. Kim were assigned for the Writers Guild of America (WGA) Award for Best Episodic Drama at the February 2007 service for composing the scene.