The One with All the Thanksgivings 

"The One with All the Thanksgivings" (otherwise called "The One with the Thanksgiving Flashbacks") is the eighth scene of the fifth period of "Friends<nowiki></nowiki>". It previously disclosed on the NBC organize in the United States on November 19, 1998. In the scene, the primary characters spend Thanksgiving at Monica's (Courteney Cox) condo and start recounting tales about their most exceedingly bad Thanksgivings: Chandler (Matthew Perry) learning of his folks' separation, Phoebe (Lisa Kudrow) losing arms in previous existences and Joey (Matt LeBlanc) having his head stuck in a turkey. Rachel (Jennifer Aniston) uncovers Monica's most noticeably awful Thanksgiving—accidentally removing Chandler's toe after he called her "fat" in their first experience. At the point when Monica asks Chandler to excuse her, he incidentally uncovers that he adores her. 

The scene was coordinated by Kevin S. Brilliant and composed by Gregory S. Malins. It visitor stars Elliott Gould and Christina Pickles as Jack and Judy Geller, with an appearance by Morgan Fairchild as Nora Tyler Bing. The thought was brought about by the essayists, who recommended short tales about the "most noticeably bad Thanksgivings ever". A flashback approach was fused as the makers understood the group of onlookers reacted well to it, in spite of concern the scene may be mistaken for a clasp appear. 

In its unique communicate the scene achieved a 16.0 Nielsen rating and completed the week positioned second. The scene earned Debra McGuire a Primetime Emmy Award designation for Outstanding Costume Design for a Series. Since airing, it every now and again positions high in surveys about the arrangement's best scene. 

Ross' (David Schwimmer) grievance that his separation and expulsion implies he is having the most exceedingly terrible Thanksgiving ever prompts the others to recount to their accounts. Chandler (Matthew Perry) helps everybody to remember when his folks disclosed to him they were separating. Phoebe (Lisa Kudrow) at that point recounts story from a previous existence when she was an American Civil War medical attendant and lost an arm, however Ross objects, with the interest of just stories of present lives. Rachel (Jennifer Aniston) says she knows Monica's (Courteney Cox) story, yet Phoebe hinders with an anecdote about the time Joey (Matt LeBlanc) had a turkey stuck on his head. Monica recounts Thanksgiving 1987. Monica and Rachel are eighteen years of age and seniors in secondary school, and an overweight Monica invests energy encouraging Rachel, after Chip finished their relationship. At the point when Ross learns of Rachel's separation, he requests that Chandler remain medium-term in the expectation of getting a date, yet Chandler won't, asserting that he wouldn't like to be screwed over thanks to "your fat sister" Monica. Catching the discussion from behind the entryway, Monica separates in removes and tempests. 

Back in the present, Chandler apologizes to Monica. Rachel uncovers that is not the story she was alluding to. The flashbacks keep on 1988; Ross and Chandler land for supper to find that Monica has thinned down, and Chandler currently discovers her alluring. Monica discloses to Rachel that she needs to embarrass Chandler for calling her fat, so Rachel proposes deceiving him into removing his garments. Monica attempts to entice Chandler by scouring different articles, including a blade, against her skin. She drops the blade and separates his toe. He is raced to medical clinic to have it reattached be that as it may, in the upheaval, Monica stirs up the digit with a carrot. In the present, Chandler progresses toward becoming disturbed subsequent to discovering that he had lost his toe since he called Monica fat, and irately leaves. At the point when Monica drops by his condo looking for his absolution by putting a turkey on her head, he coincidentally reveals to her he adores her without precedent for their relationship. A label scene demonstrates another of Phoebe's previous existence recollections as she serves in a World War I field clinic and again lost an arm. 

"The One with All the Thanksgivings" was composed by Gregory S. Malins and coordinated by Kevin S. Splendid. It is the fifth Thanksgiving uncommon in the "Companions" arrangement. The makers knew from past accounts that the gathering of people reacted well to seeing "the "Companions" as they were" and chosen to consolidate a flashback scene into a Thanksgiving unique. Show maker David Crane considered the Thanksgiving-themed scene as the "trademark appear" in each season. Marta Kauffman included discourse focusing six characters being as one out of a room made the occasion exceptional work. While talking about story thoughts, the essayists chose to make "a group of little pieces", until somebody recommended "imagine a scenario in which it's the most exceedingly bad Thanksgivings?", later utilized as the snare. Chipping away at a flashback implied the scene required "to have signifying" as the story proceeds in the present. It was hard to keep the characters, especially Chandler, immediately distraught for something that happened "years back". The comedic content was greater than expected, on the grounds that Phoebe's arm was brushed off and Joey's head stuck in a turkey. 

Numerous scenes were shot ahead of time. The makers hated shooting in advance as they favored "the gathering of people to reveal to us what's great and what's awful." They likewise were worried that a flashback scene would be confused with a clasp appear, yet felt it would be convincing in light of the fact that they were "blazing so far once more into the past." According to Kauffman, certain scenes taped in the condo were shot ahead of time since "it was everywhere"; the cast were drained and full and their vitality levels were low. Embellishments and outfit changes signified "three or four scenes" were additionally pre-shot to guarantee the discourse was occurring before the group of onlookers. This was finished in two days. 

Elliott Gould and Christina Pickles repeated their jobs as Jack and Judy Geller. The set for the Geller house was utilized already in "The One Where Joey Moves Out", for Jack's birthday party and in the season seven scene "The One Where Rosita Dies", when Ross and Monica visit their parent's carport. The flashback in Thanksgiving 1987 was Monica and Chandler's first gathering alongside Rachel and Chandler. Brilliant remarked that the show does whatever it takes not to negate itself; "when we set up something, we do whatever it takes not to fix it." In "The Pilot" it shows up Rachel meets Chandler out of the blue. She likewise meets him in a later flashback scene, "The One Where The Stripper Cries". To pardon the coherence blunder, Bright includes they don't recall each other gathering since they appear to be unique. 

An extraordinary elastic and froth turkey was made for Joey and Monica to put on their heads for clean and protection reasons. A weaving, undetectable to the group of onlookers, was set amidst the turkey to enable the character to see. Chandler's "herd of seagulls" haircut, referenced in a past scene, depended on the 1980s timeframe. For security, the scene where Monica disjoined Chandler's toe was pre-shot. Initially the sound of a blade slicing through Chandler's shoe was put, yet as per Crane it "got excessively realistic". Emotional music was named over. 

The motivation for Phoebe's character spurting blood was Dan Aykroyd's Bass-O-Matic business on "Saturday Night Live". In the sketch, Aykroyd plays a pitchman who offers a blender explicitly intended to condense fish. He coincidentally stalls out in the channel, which makes it be slashed off while blood showers all over the place. The turkey stuck on Joey's head is a reference to Act 4 in "Cheerful Christmas Mr. Bean" from "Mr. Bean". Ross and Chandler's outfits in 1988 were enlivened by "Miami Vice", which was famous at the time. The music utilized in Chandler's mishap was "The Murder" from Alfred Hitchcock's "Psycho". 

In its unique airing, the show completed second in appraisals for the seven day stretch of November 16–22, 1998, with a Nielsen rating of 16.0, proportional to around 15.5 million family units. It was the system's second most noteworthy appraised demonstrate that week, after "ER", which broadcast on that night. The scene debuted in the United Kingdom on Sky1 on February 25, 1999 and achieved 1.88 million watchers which made it the most watched demonstrate that week. It circulated on Channel 4 on August 27, 1999 and was viewed by 4.40 million watchers making "Companions" the channel's third-most elevated appraised program for the week finishing August 29, 1999. 

"Amusement Weekly" evaluated the scene "B+" and called the "pre-nose work" Rachel and "Fat Monica" incredible sight chokes. It refered to Joey's line "It's less an underwear but rather more it is an accomplishment of designing" (in reference to a thong) as the best of the scene. The creators of "Companions Like Us: The Unofficial Guide to Friends" expressed "This abnormal scene is one of the arrangement's best ever, with the relentless satire crazy ride all of a sudden tossing a splendid astonishment finishing at you". 

Debra McGuire was designated for a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Costume Design for a Series, while the blenders were selected for Outstanding Sound Mixing for a Comedy Series or a Special. The prevalence of this scene put it on one of the main Region 1 "best of" DVD discharges. It was likewise discharged as a component of Friends: The Complete Fifth Season in Regions 1, 2, and 4. 

In 2004, "The One with All the Thanksgivings" was positioned fifth in a rundown of the best 10 "Companions" scenes by the "Every day Herald" and in 2010, was distinguished as one of the five best Thanksgiving-themed scenes by "Contra Costa Times".