Go, Stewie, Go! 

"Go, Stewie, Go!" is the thirteenth scene of the eighth period of the vivified satire arrangement "Family Guy". It initially publicized on Fox in the United States on March 14, 2010. The scene highlights Stewie after he tries out, cross-dressed under the alias Smirnoff, for a female job in the American adaptation of "Happy Farm Revue", and in the long run winds up going gaga for a female co-star on the show. Then, Lois ends up pulled in to Meg's shockingly typical sweetheart, when Peter makes her understand her propelling age. 

The scene was composed by Gary Janetti and coordinated by Greg Colton. It got blended surveys from faultfinders for its storyline and numerous social references, notwithstanding getting analysis from the Parents Television Council. As indicated by Nielsen appraisals, it was seen in 6.72 million homes in its unique airing. The scene highlighted visitor exhibitions by Stephen Bishop, Mo Collins, Colin Ford, Lucas Grabeel, Anne Hathaway, Nana Visitor and Mae Whitman, alongside a few repeating visitor voice on-screen characters for the arrangement. "Go, Stewie, Go!" was discharged on DVD alongside ten different scenes from the season on December 13, 2011. 

Brian, strolling in alcoholic, sees that Stewie has continued watching "Happy Farm Revue", after beforehand swearing off the show in "Street to Europe". Recollecting a story he had found in the neighborhood paper, Brian enlightens Stewie concerning up and coming tryouts for an American rendition of the show. Seizing the chance, the two appear at the tryouts, yet rapidly discover that there is just a single female job remaining. Resolved to win a spot on the show, Stewie chooses to cross-dress as a lady, naming his new character "Karina Smirnoff". Starting his tryout, he begins by recounting to a totally manufactured story. Persuading the makers that he is telling a genuine story, he wins the job. The following morning, on the main day of recording, Stewie as Karina acquaints himself with the remainder of the cast, and rapidly becomes hopelessly enamored with a female co-star named Julie. Another co-star, Randall, articles to the new job that Karina was cast to play, and removes Julie from him to anticipate their companionship. As they keep shooting, be that as it may, the two build up a well disposed relationship, in the end choosing to hold a sleepover, where they become much nearer. The following day, Julie proclaims her adoration for Karina by longing that she was really a kid, causing Stewie, as Karina, to make advances on her. Julie demands that she is certainly not a lesbian, so Stewie chooses to disclose his actual character to the whole cast amid a live taping of the show. Stunned that Karina was really a kid, Julie's mom will not give her a chance to address him, with Stewie left to lament his choice to turn out as a cross-dresser, and chooses to run get frozen yogurt with Brian, as he can never again wear that dress. 

Then, Peter starts to affront Lois about her propelling age, including her minor strands of silver hair. This makes her amazingly unsure, and soon Lois ends up mindful of her desire for a more youthful man. Subsequent to presenting her new sweetheart, Anthony, to the family, Meg proceeds to make out with him on the family lounge chair, with Lois looking out for close-by. Envious of her little girl's freshly discovered love, she starts hitting on Anthony. Soon thereafter, Lois sends Meg to get her granddad, disregarding her everything with Anthony. The two at that point start making out on the lounge chair, yet Meg comes back to the house just a couple of minutes after the fact and finds them. Irate at her mom for demolishing her opportunity at having a typical beau, Meg undermines Lois to lay off of him, hauling out one of her own teeth in disappointment. Lois rapidly concurs, however is as yet furious with Peter for persistently offending her. She stands up to him about this, and he concedes that he was really humiliated about his own propelling age, just as his absence of wellness, and was just offending Lois so as to occupy her from the way that she could be with a vastly improved looking man. He is sorry for his conduct, and Lois excuses him. 

The scene was composed by returning author Gary Janetti, his first scene since the fourth season scene "". What's more, the scene was coordinated by arrangement ordinary Greg Colton, before the finish of the seventh creation season. The scene was Colton's second for the season, the first being the season debut, "Street to the Multiverse", which got high commendation from pundits. The scene saw the third re-appearance, the first being a similarly short appearance in "Spies Reminiscent of Us" and the second in "Street to the Multiverse", by previous primary give part Mike Henry a role as the voice of Cleveland Brown. The performing artist had recently left the job on "Family Guy", so as to star as the character in his own turn off, entitled "The Cleveland Show". 

"Go, Stewie, Go!", alongside the eleven different scenes from "Family Guy"s eighth season, was discharged on a three-circle DVD set in the United States on December 13, 2011. The sets incorporate brief sound analyses by different team and cast individuals for a few scenes, an accumulation of erased scenes and animatics, an extraordinary small component which talked about the procedure behind energizing "And after that There Were Fewer", a smaller than expected element entitled "The Comical Adventures of "Family Guy" – Brian and Stewie: The Lost Phone Call", and film of the "Family Guy" board at the 2010 San Diego Comic-Con International. 

Notwithstanding the normal cast, artist Stephen Bishop rerecorded his single "It Might Be You", performing artist Mo Collins showed up as a young lady, voice performer Colin Ford seemed quickly as Randall, on-screen character Anne Hathaway showed up as Mother Maggie, on-screen character Lucas Grabeel showed up as Meg's new beau Anthony, voice on-screen character Nana Visitor seemed quickly as the tryout guest and voice on-screen character Mae Whitman showed up as Julie. Repeating visitor voice on-screen characters Ralph Garman, essayist Gary Janetti, author Danny Smith, essayist Alec Sulkin, on-screen character Jennifer Tilly and author John Viener additionally shown up. 

Albeit never explicitly referenced or referenced in the scene itself, Stewie's modify personality is named after surely understood partner dancer Karina Smirnoff, who had recently moved expertly on the American TV unscripted TV drama "Hitting the dance floor with the Stars". The greater part of the storyline following Stewie is a reverence of the 1982 film "Tootsie". The scene's title is additionally a reference to the melody "Go, Tootsie, Go" played amid the photograph shoot montage in the film. A comparable scene including the melody was marginally changed, supplanting "Tootsie" with "Stewie," in the verses to the tune. Another tune from the film, "It Might Be You" by Stephen Bishop, is played amid the end credit grouping. 

As Stewie and Brian watch a recorded scene of "Buoyant Farm Revue", Stewie takes note of the acquaintance of a few new characters with the show. The TV screen is then appeared, as Karina uncovers the characters to his co-star, Julie. The new characters incorporate satires of the "Sesame Street" characters Big Bird, who portrays himself as a "major flying creature," and a self-depicted "mope" named "Grumpy Green Garbage Creature", who takes after Oscar the Grouch, and butch and femme renditions of Bert and Ernie, who attempt to shield Karina and Julie from Oscar. 

In the wake of sending Meg out on an errand to get her granddad, Lois keeps on alluring Anthony, having been keen on him since Peter had started offending her about her propelling age. Rapidly returning subsequent to overlooking the vehicle keys, Meg finds her mom making out with her new beau on the sofa. The bass jingle utilized broadly in the long-running NBC sitcom "Seinfeld" is then heard, with the scene stopping, before progressing to the "Carefree Farm" studio. In an unexpected visit to the Griffin family home, Julie surprisingly shows up when Stewie opens the front entryway. Expecting Julie to remember him, he overlooks that he isn't dressed as Karina, making him quickly change apparel, while professing to have a contention with his manufactured persona. A comparative scene is highlighted in the 1993 film "Mrs. Doubtfire", featuring on-screen character Robin Williams. Stewie and Jolly Farm make a reference to Pan Am Flight 103, a Boeing 747–100 decimated by a psychological oppressor bomb over Lockerbie, Scotland, slaughtering each of the 259 tenants. Huge parts of the plane fell onto Lockerbie, which executed 11 individuals, raising the loss of life to 270. A melody includes on Jolly Farm that unequivocally depicts flotsam and jetsam from the recently broken down plane falling into Lockerbie, sung in the design of a nursery rhyme. 

In an improvement over the past two scenes, the scene was seen in 6.72 million homes in its unique airing, as indicated by Nielsen evaluations. The scene additionally gained a 3.5 rating in the 18–49 statistic, beating "The Simpsons", just as the arrangement debut of "Children of Tucson", notwithstanding altogether pushing out the two shows in all out viewership. 

Surveys of the scene were blended, considering the storyline a " material in the long-running useless yet friendly connection among Brian and Stewie," while censuring its numerous social references. Todd VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club considered the scene a "charming shock," making the most of Stewie's storyline, while condemning the subplot among Lois and Meg. Ramsey Isler of IGN was substantially more condemning of the scene, in any case, saying that "while there a few clever minutes, there are a larger number of misses than hits," giving the scene a 6 out of 10. In a resulting audit of "Family Guy"s eighth season, Isler recorded "Go, Stewie, Go!" as being "loaded with the most minimal of the most minimized shared variable "jokes", with substantial dependence on latrine humor and the trademark cutaway chokes that have relentlessly gotten progressively arbitrary and less entertaining." conversely, Jason Hughes of TV Squad commended the scene, saying that it " an enthusiastic look into the characters." 

Naming the scene as its "Most exceedingly awful TV Show of the Week" for "solid sexual substance," the Parents Television Council considered the scene a "disgusting extraordinary failure," censuring various scenes, incorporating Lois making out with a minor, just as the showdown among Brian and Karina at the bar. The PTC additionally scrutinized Seth MacFarlane for endeavoring to "evoke sicken" all through the scene by " interbreeding and assault" so as to "incite ." 

The scene was vigorously reprimanded by groups of the casualties of Pan Am Flight 103 for the nursery rhyme, "It's down-pouring children and gear and appendages and Daddy doesn't get back home", which unequivocally depicts the flotsam and jetsam from the crumbling plane falling into Lockerbie, sung in the design of that of a nursery rhyme.