Chausath Yogini Temple, Morena 

The Chausath Yogini Temple, Morena, otherwise called Ekattarso Mahadeva Temple, is an eleventh century sanctuary situated in Morena region in the Indian province of Madhya Pradesh. It is one of only a handful couple of such Yogini sanctuaries in the nation which is in a decent condition. The sanctuary is framed by a roundabout divider with 64 loads and an open mandapa in the middle, isolated by a yard which is round fit as a fiddle, where Shiva is exalted. The sanctuary has been proclaimed an antiquated authentic landmark by the Archeological Survey of India. 

The Chausath Yogini sanctuary is in Mitaoli town (additionally spelled Mitawali or Mitavali), close Padaoli in Morena area from Gwalior. As indicated by an engraving dated to 1323 CE (Vikram Samvat 1383), the sanctuary was worked by the Kachchhapaghata ruler Devapala (). It is said that the sanctuary was the setting of giving instruction in crystal gazing and science dependent on the travel of the Sun. 

The Archeological Survey of India has announced the sanctuary an old and recorded landmark under Act No. LXXI of 1951, dt.28/11/1951. 

The sanctuary is situated on a slope which is about in tallness and there are 100 stages to climb prompting the passage of the sanctuary. It is remotely round fit as a fiddle with a sweep of and inside its inside part it has 64 little loads, each with a mandapa which is open and a facia of pilasters and columns. The top of the whole structure is level including that of another east-bound roundabout sanctuary inside the external round divider. A substantial section or patio lies between the external fenced in area and the focal sanctuary which is committed to Lord Shiva. There is an open yard access to this sanctuary. The outside surface of the external divider has carvings of Hindu divinities. Every one of the 64 chambers in the external circle has a picture of Shiva revered in it. In any case, late examinations have affirmed that initially these had a Yogini picture worshipped in them and thus the sanctuary is known as Chausath Yogini Temple ('Chausath' here signifies "Sixty four" ). It is said that the rooftop over the 64 chambers and the focal hallowed place had towers or shikharas which were most likely expelled amid later adjustments. 

Inside the fundamental focal sanctuary there are piece covers which have holes in them to deplete water to a vast underground stockpiling. The pipe lines from the rooftop lead the downpour water to the capacity are additionally obvious. The sanctuary needs preservation measures to safeguard the antiquated landmark fit as a fiddle. 

The plan of the sanctuary has withstood quake stuns, with no harm to its roundabout basic highlights, in the previous a few centuries. The sanctuary is in the Seismic Zone III. This reality was refered to when the issue of security from seismic tremor impact of the Parliament House which is likewise a roundabout structure, like the Chausath Yogini Temple, was bantered in the Indian Parliament. 

Taking note of a portion of its structural likenesses, usually expressed that Delhi's Parliament House which was worked during the 1920s has been designed on the lines of this roundabout molded sanctuary. There is, be that as it may, no solid reason for this.