In Excelsis Deo 

"In Excelsis Deo" is the tenth scene of the principal period of "The West Wing". It initially broadcast on NBC December 15, 1999, as the show's Christmas exceptional. Occasions hover around Toby getting associated with the destiny of a dead Korean War veteran, responses to an extreme abhor wrongdoing, and the progressing debate encompassing Leo's past liquor and physician endorsed medicate misuse. Composed by Aaron Sorkin and Rick Cleveland and coordinated by Alex Graves, the scene contains visitor appearances by Paul Austin and Raynor Scheine. It likewise earned Sorkin and Cleveland the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Writing for a Drama Series, just as one for Richard Schiff. 

As the scene starts, Toby gets called by the D.C. police to recognize a dead vagrant. It turns out the man (a Korean War veteran from the 2/7) was wearing a coat that Toby gave to Goodwill, and Toby had left his business card in it. The occasion remains with him, and he finds the man's closest relative. The main relative he can discover is a sibling, additionally destitute. Utilizing the impact of the president's office, he masterminds a military memorial service at Arlington. President Bartlet is educated about Toby’s transgression, yet can possibly gather restricted anger and jokingly inquires as to whether the nation is still in NATO. To the president's worry this could make point of reference for different veterans to approach, Toby answers "I can dare to dream, sir." Mrs Landingham, who has quite recently educated Charlie concerning losing her twin children in the Vietnam War, joins Toby and the veteran's sibling at the burial service. 

In the interim, Josh – who is concerned that Rep. Subside Lillienfield (R) may uncover data the Congressman has about Leo's past treatment for liquor and Valium misuse – approaches Sam and proposes utilizing Sam's whore companion to uncover earth for use as influence against Lillienfield's partners when the opportunity arrives. Leo questions firmly to the arrangement, calling it exploitative. 

C. J. gets sincerely associated with an anecdote about the destructive attack on a gay youth. She considers this to be a chance to push detest wrongdoing enactment, however the proposal discovers little help among the others. Correspondent Danny Concannon likewise dissents, yet this urges her to at long last acknowledge his idea of a date, to have him persuade her. 

President Bartlet escapes to go out on the town to shop at an uncommon book shop and won't take picture takers along, a lot to Mandy's embarrassment. Donna has now been annoying Josh about her Christmas present throughout the day. While he doesn't pursue the rundown submitted, he grabs a book for her at the shop and composes a message in it that abandons her mournful however upbeat. 

The scene's title is taken from the holy messengers' tune to the shepherds in Luke 2:14, declaring the introduction of Jesus, and is in reference to the show's Christmas topic. The words additionally make up the start of the Great Doxology: "Gloria in Excelsis Deo" (Glory to God in the most noteworthy). 

It was granted the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Writing for a Drama Series, credited to Aaron Sorkin and Rick Cleveland. In the late spring of 2001, an open contention broke out between the two on the web gathering mightybigtv.com (later known as Television Without Pity). Cleveland professed to have had the first thought, in light of the encounters of his dad who was a Korean War veteran, and felt annoyed that Sorkin had not allowed him to respect his father’s memory at the honor function. Sorkin reacted that Cleveland had not contributed altogether, and that composition credits were essentially pivoted among the staff essayists. The contention finished agreeably, with Sorkin saying 'sorry' for putting down Cleveland's exertion and the two journalists communicating their reverence for one another. 

The scene at Arlington was made with the full co-activity of the Pentagon, who preferred the message of the content and needed to do what they could to help. Initially, the president was to have been in the scene too, however this was changed in light of the fact that it "removed the intensity of Mrs. Landingham and Ziegler"; it was felt that the scene would be all the more dominant without the approaching nearness of the CEO. The fourth individual going to the memorial service is the administrator of Arlington National Cemetery John C. Metzler, Jr., showing up as himself. The memorial service is joined by the tune "The Little Drummer Boy", sung by the young men's choir. 

The anecdote about the despise wrongdoing against the youthful gay man depends on the genuine instance of Matthew Shepard. This was affirmed by Allison Janney in a meeting with the gay magazine "The Advocate". 

Sorkin and Cleveland won the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Writing for a Drama Series, and on-screen character Richard Schiff (Toby Ziegler) was granted the prize for Outstanding Supporting Actor in Drama Series. The scene was likewise assigned for Outstanding Single-Camera Picture Editing for a Series and Outstanding Sound Mixing for a Drama Series. Cleveland and Sorkin likewise won the at the 53rd Writers Guild of America Awards.