Rebecca Anderson 

Rebecca Anderson (conceived May 1991) is an American delight show titleholder from Oregon City, Oregon. She won a progression of nearby titles starting in 2011 and was delegated Miss Oregon 2014. 

Entering her first exhibition at age 19, Anderson contended effectively in neighborhood events until, on her fourth endeavor, she won the state title in June 2014. She showed up over the state and spoke to Oregon at Miss America 2015 in September 2014 yet was not a finalist for the national crown. Subsequent to finishing her year as Miss Oregon, Anderson continued her scholarly interests. 

Anderson is a local of Oregon City, Oregon, and a 2009 alumni of Oregon City High School. While at OCHS, she partook in the dramatization program for a long time and was an individual from the school's move group for a long time. Her dad is Ted Anderson, a discount nursery administrator and authorized expense specialist. , mother Shari Anderson is the chosen County Treasurer of Clackamas County, Oregon, an office she has held since 1999. Anderson has one more youthful sister, Malea, who is likewise an intermittent show contender. 

Anderson is a 2013 alumni of Portland State University where she earned a four year college education in ecological science. In 2014, notwithstanding her Miss Oregon obligations, Anderson worked low maintenance as a "charming" comedian for an occasion organization. In August 2015, Anderson moved to North Dakota to start seeking after a four year certification in climatic science at the University of North Dakota. 

Anderson started entering shows at age 19, holding up until she felt was "sufficiently mindful" to hold an expo title. In mid 2011, Anderson won the Miss Cascade 2011 title. She contended in the 2011 Miss Oregon exhibition with the stage "Natural Sustainability: Education for a Greener World" and a vocal act of "Feeling Better" from the melodic "The Roar of the Greasepaint – The Smell of the Crowd" in the ability bit of the challenge. She completed in the main ten yet was not a Top-5 finalist for the state title. 

In mid 2012, Anderson won the Miss Columbia Gorge 2012 title. She contended in the 2012 Miss Oregon exhibition with the stage "Natural Education" and a vocal act in the ability part of the challenge. She completed in the best ten however was not a Top-5 finalist for the state crown. 

In March 2013, Anderson won the Miss Portland 2013 title. She fit the bill for the 2013 Miss Oregon expo as one of 22 participants, including her more youthful sister Malea, contending as Miss Clackamas 2013. Rebecca Anderson rivaled a stage of "American Red Cross: Red forever" and a vocal exhibition of "Amazing" from the melodic "Little Women" in the ability bit of the challenge. She was named third sprinter up to victor Allison Cook. 

On April 26, 2014, Anderson was delegated Miss Cascade 2014. She entered the Miss Oregon exhibition in June 2014 as one of 23 qualifiers for the state title. Anderson's opposition ability was a vocal act of "Let it Go" from the Disney motion picture "Solidified". Her stage was "American Red Cross: Red forever". Her dramatic inquiry question asked whether separation was a factor in the sexual orientation pay hole in the United States. Anderson concurred yet countered that "ladies should be increasingly self-assured" and endeavor to close the hole themselves as opposed to sit tight for an administration ordered arrangement. 

Anderson won the challenge on Saturday, June 28, 2014, when she got her crown from active Miss Oregon titleholder Allison Cook. She earned more than $10,000 in grant cash and different prizes from the state event. 

As Miss Oregon, Anderson's exercises included open appearances over the province of Oregon. Eminent appearances included taking part in nearby events, inviting Air National Guard individuals home to Oregon, and filling in as a judge for the Just For Men World Beard and Mustache Championships. Anderson's rule as Miss Oregon proceeded until June 27, 2015, when she delegated her successor, Ali Wallace, Miss Oregon 2015. 

Anderson was Oregon's delegate at the Miss America 2015 show in Atlantic City, New Jersey, in September 2014. Amid the event's "Demonstrate to Us Your Shoes" march, Anderson wore a bike head protector and her shoes had minor bikes over the bands to tout Portland, Oregon, as a "bicycle inviting" city. She was not a Top-16 semi-finalist for the national crown.