Mixco Viejo 

Mixco Viejo () ("Old Mixco"), every so often spelt Mixcu Viejo, is an archeological site in the north east of the Chimaltenango division of Guatemala, some toward the north of Guatemala City and from the intersection of the streams Pixcaya and Motagua. It is a moderate estimated destroyed city of the Postclassic Maya human progress. 

The archeological site and vacation spot of Mixco Viejo was named in the wake of being incorrectly connected with the Postclassic Poqomam capital alluded to in pilgrim records by that name. The archeological site has now been distinguished as Jilotepeque Viejo, the capital of the Chajoma Kaqchikel kingdom. To recognize the two, the remains of the Chajoma capital are presently alluded to as Mixco Viejo (Jilotepeque Viejo) while the previous Poqomam capital is alluded to as Mixco Viejo (Chinautla Viejo). 

This perplexity in the recognizable proof of the site has blocked examination. The Chajoma capital has been explored archeologically, under the supposition that it was the Poqomam capital. Despite the fact that the Chajoma remnants of Jilotepeque Viejo have been very much portrayed archeologically, the archeological information has been related with the historical backdrop of an alternate site altogether. Questions about the distinguishing proof of the archeological site were first raised by Robert M. Carmack, who understood that the alleged Poqomam capital was not situated inside the Poqomam phonetic region but instead inside the semantic territory of the Kaqchikels. The Poqomam who were settled in the new provincial settlement of Mixco by the Spanish had a long history of fine polychrome clay creation, yet no proof of such generation had been recouped amid archeological examinations, and the vestiges were considered excessively inaccessible from pilgrim Mixco. 

Chinautla Viejo was assaulted by the attacking Spanish in 1525; the initial two assaults against the intensely braced city were fruitless. The attacked city got Poqomam fortifications that were extensively vanquished on an open field of fight, with the Spanish rangers being conclusive. The catch of Poqomam detainees enabled the Spanish to find the area of a cavern giving a mystery access to the city. A third attack broke the month-long attack, enabling the Spanish to take the city. The enduring occupants were moved to another settlement and Pedro de Alvarado requested the city to be singed. 

Jilotepeque Viejo was settled by the Chajoma so as to give a capital that was more secure from assault from the threatening Iximche Kaqchikel kingdom than their past capital. Regardless of this, the city fell under the mastery of Iximche and the city's design, spread in various strengthened gatherings along an edge encompassed by profound gorges, demonstrates a blend of Chajoma and Kaqchikel styles. At the season of the Spanish triumph, the Chajoma of Jilotepeque Viejo may have at first aligned themselves with the Spanish together with Iximche and have participated in the general Kaqchikel uprising against the Spanish in 1524. The site was relinquished after the success and never reoccupied. 

The chronicled Mixco Viejo has been distinguished as Chinautla Viejo ("Old Chinautla"), close to the advanced town of Mixco. Mixco Viejo ("Old Mixco") was the capital of the Poqomam Maya kingdom, and was established on a protective peak area in the twelfth century AD. The pinnacle populace in the mid sixteenth century may have been around 10,000 individuals. 

In 1525 Pedro de Alvarado sent a little organization to vanquish Mixco Viejo (Chinautla Viejo), the capital of the Poqomam. At the Spanish methodology, the occupants stayed encased in the braced city. The Spanish endeavored a methodology from the west through a thin pass however were constrained back with overwhelming misfortunes. Alvarado himself propelled the second ambush with 200 Tlaxcalan partners but at the same time was beaten back. The Poqomam at that point got fortifications, potentially from Chinautla, and the two militaries conflicted on open ground outside of the city. The fight was confused and went on for the vast majority of the day yet was at long last chosen by the Spanish rangers, compelling the Poqomam fortifications to pull back. The pioneers of the fortifications surrendered to the Spanish three days after their retreat and uncovered that the city had a mystery entrance as a cavern driving up from an adjacent stream, enabling the occupants to travel every which way. 

Furnished with the information picked up from their detainees, Alvarado sent 40 men to cover the exit from the cavern and propelled another strike along the gorge from the west, in single document inferable from its restriction, with crossbowmen rotating with officers bearing black powder guns, each with a friend protecting him from bolts and stones with a shield. This strategy enabled the Spanish to get through the pass and tempest the passage of the city. The Poqomam warriors fell back in confusion in a riotous retreat through the city, and were chased somewhere near the triumphant conquistadors and their Mesoamerican partners. The individuals who figured out how to withdraw down the neighboring valley were trapped by Spanish mounted force who had been presented on square the exit from the cavern, the survivors were caught and took back to the city. The attack had endured over a month and in light of the guarded quality of the city, Alvarado requested it to be singed and moved the occupants to the new frontier town of Mixco. 

Despite the fact that the site presently known as Mixco Viejo was generally viewed as the Poqomam capital, late examinations have rather distinguished the remains as the capital of the Kaqchikel-speaking Chajoma Maya, and have recommended that its ID as the verifiable Mixco Viejo is the aftereffect of disarray in the translation of pioneer records. The site was clearly known to the Chajoma by an assortment of names, including "Chuapec Kekacajol Nima Abaj" (likewise spelt "Chuwa Pek Q'eqak'ajol Nima Ab'aj"), signifying "Incredible stone before the Cave of the Children of Night", "Zakicajol" and "Nimcakajpec". Jilotepeque Viejo is assessed to have had a populace of roughly 1,500 occupants. Jilotepeque was near the San Martă­n Jilotepeque obsidian source, giving the occupants prepared access to the asset. 

The site is available to the general population and has a little exhibition hall. The site was pronounced an ensured archeological zone by Ministerial Accord 1210 of the Guatemalan Ministry of Education on 12 June 1970. 

The remains are arranged at the northeastern extraordinary of the division of Chimaltenango inside the district of San Martă­n Jilotepeque; they are unstable over along a high edge roughly from the point where the Pixcaya River streams into the Motagua River, which channels into the Caribbean Sea. The remains are encompassed by profound gorges dropping off pointedly into a tributary of the Pixcaya River. The site is from Guatemala City by street. 

"All dates are surmised." 

Around 1450 the Chajoma, driven by their ruler Lajuj No'j, moved to Mixco Viejo (Jilotepeque Viejo) from Ochal to make their capital increasingly out of reach to their unfriendly neighbors. Disregarding this, Iximche crushed the Chajoma and Jilotepeque Viejo ended up subject to the Kaqchikel kingdom. Gatherings C and E show Kaqchikel impact in their structural styles, while bunches An and B have a cleaner Chajoma engineering style. Both ballcourts seem to have been renovated after the Kaqchikel design, with thick coatings of stucco. 

Around the thirteenth century, Group An experienced a noteworthy rebuilding, including the development of another holding divider and the infilling of the wide territory between the old and new dividers, making a much extended patio for the development of the gathering's engineering. Attributable to its ownership of two ballcourts, it is conceivable that Jilotepeque Viejo filled in as a territorial place for the Mesoamerican ballgame amid the Postclassic; no other Postclassic ballcourt has been recognized in the zone of San Martă­n Jilotepeque albeit three of four Classic period ballcourts at different destinations seem to have proceeded being used. In the blink of an eye before the Spanish Conquest, the Chajoma under their ruler Achi Q'alel defied the Kaqchikels of Iximche. 

It is conceivable that the Chajoma of Mixco Viejo (Jilotepeque Viejo) at first aligned themselves with the Spanish together with the Kaqchikel kingdom of Iximche, and that they likewise defied the Spanish in 1524. It is realized that when the rulers of Iximche broke their collusion with the conquistadors, they took shelter in Jilotepeque. The site was deserted after the Spanish triumph and the occupants were moved by the Spanish to San Martă­n Jilotepeque, after which the zone was never reoccupied. 

German geographer Karl Sapper visited the remnants in 1896 and distributed a concise portrayal of the remains together with a site map two years after the fact in a 6-page handout by the "Internationales Archiv făźr Ethnographie" of Leyden in the Netherlands, entitled "Kick the bucket Ruinen von Mixco, Guatemala". It was Sapper who marked every one of the archeological gatherings and their chaperon structures. American prehistorian A. Ledyard Smith visited the vestiges in 1949 and composed a section about the site in his "Archeological Reconnaissance in Central America", distributed by the Carnegie Institution of Washington in 1955. Archeological unearthings were brought out from 1954 through 1967 by the Musăše de l'Homme of Paris under the course of paleologist Henri Lehmann, who surely trusted that he was exhuming the Pocomam capital as portrayed in Colonial records. 

In spite of the fact that the site was reestablished amid the archeological examinations, it endured extensive harm in the 1976 Guatemala tremor. This brought about demolition of a portion of the reclamation work, albeit a portion of the harm has now been fixed. 

The vestiges comprise of 15 bunches containing the remaining parts of more than 120 noteworthy structures, including sanctuaries, royal residences, and courts for playing the Mesoamerican ballgame. At the point when the site was uncovered, the surface was observed to be covered with bottomless obsidian sharp edges and sharpened stones. Initially the city had its primary passage on the western side, a cutting edge street has now been sliced through to the vestiges from the west along a comparative course. 

The moderately brief time of occupation at Mixco Viejo (Jilotepeque Viejo) prompted an uncommon solidarity of engineering styles for a Mesoamerican city. Practically all archeological finds at the city, including the two ancient rarities and prior forms of later structures, date to the last couple of hundred years before the Spanish success. The design was worked with mica and pumice chunks, now and again this was covered with stucco. Stone figure is absolutely missing from the city, the main precedent being a ballcourt marker as a snake's head with jaws agape and a human head rising up out of its mouth. Initially a few structures were enriched with painted stucco however this is so ineffectively protected that just a couple of pieces remain. 

A populace gauge got from the quantity of private remains proposes that the city had around 1450 to 1600 occupants. 

The design is isolated into various gatherings and subgroups, marked by archeologists as Groups A through to L; those subgroups having a place with Groups A, B, C and E that fall outside the city dividers are shown with the expansion of a X or a punctuation after the gathering name, to give Group A-X, Group B-X, Group C' and Group E'. 

Gathering An is situated on the northern end of the edge. The gathering was stretched out amid major rebuilding work that incorporated the structure of the last forms of Platforms A2 and A3 on the north side; this included structure another holding divider some further north, east and southeast and filling in the region between the new and old dividers to make an extraordinarily extended patio. Hints of charcoal at the base of the old holding divider have been radiocarbon dated to the thirteenth century, showing that the development of Group An occurred no sooner than that. 

Pyramid A1 is one of the vital structures of Group A, together with the ballcourt. The pyramid is high and measures at the base. It was manufactured utilizing cut stone and has four ventured levels, every one of which ends in a cornice. The pyramid faces west onto the square and has two access stairways with 27 stages each. The stairways are flanked by smooth balustrades worked from well-fitted chunks. The summit of the pyramid bolsters a high stage that once framed the base for the summit sanctuary. The pyramid was worked over another structure, a stucco stage with two dimensions, the upper of which ended in a cornice. 

Stage A2 is worked along the edge of the holding divider behind Pyramid A1. It faces west towards the pyramid and has two access stairways. Three progressive renditions of the stage were constructed, each overlying the past. The most punctual form sat upon the early holding divider, as did the second form. The last form was a lot bigger and was worked after the new holding divider had expanded the accessible zone for Group A. 

Stage A3 encases the north side of the eastern piece of the Group A square. It faces south onto the court and was gotten to by means of two stairways on that side. The stage was worked over a before structure that was based over an early layered holding divider; the prior structure stretched out over the holding divider. The last form stretched out further toward the west and further toward the north. It had two dimensions, each ending in a cornice. On the north side a wide seat stretches out along the base of the divider. 

Stage A4 separates the Group A court in two. It was a later expansion to Group An amid the redesign of the gathering that included the decimation of the prior structure under Platform A5. At the point when exhumed it was all around ineffectively held yet had the capacity to be dependably reestablished. There was no before variant of the structure; it comprises of a stage with two dimensions that faces east towards the vital engineering of Group A. The upper dimension is finished with a cornice and access was by means of two stairways flanked by balustrades. 

Stage A5 shuts the north side of the Group A court. The stage has two dimensions upon a base and a cornice ending the dividers. The stage faces south towards the court and ballcourt. The stage was gotten to by means of four stairways, each with nine stages; they were flanked by soak slopes or balustrades. The noticeable adaptation of Platform A5 covers the remaining parts of a prior structure. The prior structure was an expansive stage with a north-south introduction rather than the east-west introduction of Platform A5. The enduring parts were researched by archeologists and comprise of the north divider and parts of the west exterior. The north divider was wide, proposing that the prior stage was huge and likely broadened south nearly to the extent the ballcourt. Two funerary urns were uncovered from the before stage. 

Stage A6 encases the western outrageous of the Group A square. The stage has two dimensions, the upper of which has a vertical cornice. The stage faces east onto the square; get to was by means of two stairways flanked by balustrades ending in vertical cornices. Stage A6 was worked over a more established variant of a similar structure; this prior development stage was littler and its stairways were annihilated so as to assemble the stairways of the last form. Amid rebuilding work completed by archeologists the back divider and an area of the veneer were left uncovered. Four funerary urns were found related with the stage, for the most part buried under the front of the structure. 

Structure A7 is a little square special stepped area amidst the eastern piece of the Group A court. It faces west with ventures on that side. 

Stage A8 is toward the east of Pyramid A1, on the eastern side of the Group A square. It faces northwest towards the pyramid and had two access stairways. Behind the stage was a finely cleared porch stretching out along the edge of the holding divider. 

Stage A9 is toward the east of the ballcourt (A11) and appearances towards it. It had four access stairways set between corniced balustrades; every stairway had nine stages. 

Ballcourt A11 encases the west side of the Group A square, isolating it from the holding divider dropping off to the gorge behind the ballcourt. It is an indented ballcourt with a north-south introduction and is altogether encased. A short indented stairway leads from the court to the highest point of the south divider. Another stairway slips the south divider toward the southern end zone of the ballcourt. A coordinating stairway in the northern end zone gives access from that heading. The inside of the ballcourt playing region estimates north-south and the playing back road is wide between the side seats. The dividers were worked of little stone chunks and have a slight slant; as is regular with the engineering of Mixco Viejo (Jilotepeque Viejo), the dividers were finished with vertical cornices. Be that as it may, the end zone dividers are largely totally vertical. Sections of stucco recouped around the ballcourt demonstrate that it was in any event incompletely covered. 

Structure A12 was a private structure on the southwest side of the Group A square between the ballcourt and Platform A6. All that remaining parts of this structure is its framework set apart in stones. 

Structure A14 was a private structure quickly upper east of Platform A5. 

Structures A31 and A32 were private structures close stage A5 on the north side of the Group A square. 

Gathering A-X characterizes various structures in two subgroups lying outside the dividers of Group A, toward the upper east and northwest of the principle gathering. 

Gathering B is close to the focal point of the site, generally equidistant between Group A (toward the upper east) and Group C (toward the southwest). The principle square of Group B was at the northern end of the gathering and was encased by the ballcourt on the south side, a twofold pyramid on the east side and three stages. A stairway with 28 stages drops the Group B holding divider behind the upper east corner of the twofold pyramid, giving an entrance course towards Group D. On the north side of the gathering another stairway, with 18 stages isolated into two flights, dives towards Group A. 

Ballcourt B1 is promptly south of the Group B square, with the northern access to the ballcourt legitimately getting to the court itself. It is an encased indented ballcourt, as was normal in the Maya good countries amid the Late Postclassic. The ballcourt is adjusted north-south to two transverse end zones framing a capital I shape. The ballcourt has two passageways as inset stairways at last zones, in the focal point of the ballcourt's north and south dividers. The side dividers of the playing back street are somewhat slanted and are bested by a cornice; the playing rear way is flanked by two low seats set against the east and west dividers. The end zones additionally have inclining dividers. All the ballcourt dividers were worked of substantial stones. The ballcourt playing zone estimates north-south and is wide between the seats. The end zones measure east-west. The ballcourt was initially covered in stucco painted in an assortment of hues; next to no of this covering presently remains. A channel opening exhausts overflow water from the east side of the northern end zone; the channel proceeds under Platform B 2 and purges outside the holding mass of Group B. 

Amid archeological examination of the ballcourt a well-saved tennoned ballgame marker was discovered set on the western seat. Its unique position was demonstrated by an opening in the upper piece of the ballcourt divider. The second marker that would have been set straightforwardly inverse the first has never been found and the region of the ballcourt divider where it would have been had fell preceding unearthings. Copies of the ballcourt marker have been put in the two dividers; the first is in the Museo Nacional de Arqueologă­a y Etnologă­a in Guatemala City. 

Stage B2 is adjusted upper east to southwest and faces northwest onto the Group B square. It had two access stairways flanked by soak balustrades finished with vertical cornices. Behind the stage two stairways plummet Group B's holding divider towards Group B-X. 

Pyramid B3 is really two pyramids based upon a solitary basal stage. Together they contain the most vital design unit in Group B. The northern pyramid of the pair is designated B3a; the southern is B3b. The two pyramids each have five ventured levels and face west onto the court. Each pyramid was gotten to by a solitary stairway flanked by wide balustrades; each had a little raised area at the base of its stairway. Both stairways had nineteen stages and the pyramids stand high. Low stages on their summits show where the sanctuary structures once stood. The twofold type of the twin pyramids had its starting point in the Valley of Mexico and demonstrates remote impacts at the city. A broken stela was unearthed from inside the fill of Pyramid B3a; it was a plain landmark broken in two sections. The base area still stood, while the upper segment was lying adjacent to it. It is one of not very many such landmarks brought up in the Maya good countries and such stelae are normal for the Classic Period (c. 250â900). It is conceivable that it stands where initially raised before the pyramid was worked over it. A funerary urn was unearthed from underneath the back of Pyramid B3b. 

A channel close to the upper east corner of Pyramid B3 conveys spillover water from the Group B court and channels it outside the holding divider to the territory between Groups B and D. 

Stage B4 encases the north side of the Group B court. The stage comprises of a solitary dimension set upon a base and has corniced dividers. Access was by means of an inset stairway in the focal point of the south side. The stage top was stunned with pieces and had a low twofold porch at the back. 

Stage B5 has two ventured levels with cornices and encases the northern piece of the west side of the Group B court. The lower level has a solitary inset stairway, while the upper porch has two stairways flanked by balustrades, with a third balustrade isolating the two. The stage gives a wide view over the Pancaco River valley toward the west. Structure B5 was based over a before development stage, which is uncovered along the upper bit of the back divider since rebuilding of the structure just revamped the lower partition. It was worked from stone pieces and was initially taller than the last form of the stage however was curtailed to the diminished stature of the new structure. 

Pyramid B6 encased the southern part of the west side of the Group B court. It is all around inadequately saved and the highest point of the pyramid has fell, leaving just the lower dividers. Archeological examination uncovered that the last form of the pyramid had been worked over a previous variant. 

Structure B7 was a little, proportional rectangular structure south of the primary Group A square, between the north end of the ballcourt (B1) toward the east and Structure B9 toward the west. This structure was probably going to have been a special raised area place of worship. 

Stage B8 is a range structure on the west side of Group B. It comprises of a basal stage supporting internal slanting dividers that end in a cornice. The structure faces east and has four access stairways isolated by close vertical balustrades. The holding mass of Group B drops away into the neighboring gorge behind Platform B8. An extraordinary number of funerary urns were unearthed around the base of this stage. 

Gathering B-X incorporates various structures in three subgroups outside the dividers of Group B; they are toward the northwest, upper east and east of Group B itself. 

Structure B-X3 is a stage pyramid with sides so steep that it is practically cubic fit as a fiddle. This sanctuary stage would initially have upheld a transitory superstructure yet no hint of this currently remains. The pyramid faces west and was gotten to by an incredibly steep stairway with fifteen stages that faces straightforwardly onto the monstrous high holding mass of Group B. The stairway is flanked by wide balustrades that structure the western veneer of the sanctuary stage. Structure B-X3 has been reestablished. 

Structure B-X4 has likewise been reestablished. It is a south-bound range structure with four inset get to stairways. 

Gathering C misleads the southwest of Group B and east of Group E. Gathering C is masterminded around two substantial structures (C1 and C2). It has two little courts; the East Plaza is the bigger of the two, encasing a region toward the east of the primary sanctuary, Pyramid C1. The East Plaza was gotten to by means of a limited back road that kept running between a substantial, low stage and a high-status private structure with a porch (C8). An inset stairway moved outside of the holding mass of Group C and got to the East Plaza between the high-status living arrangement and a stage to its east. The West Plaza is situated behind Platform C2 and is encased toward the north by three stages (C9, C10 and C17). 

Pyramid C1 is the important structure in Group C. Archeological examination revealed three forms of the pyramid, each worked in the course of the last. The archeologists reestablished the pyramid so as to make a piece of every one of the three development stages obvious. The main period of development comprised of a stage of cut pumice squares. This was covered under the second development stage, which comprised of a five-level ventured pyramid. It had a twofold stairway on the west side; every stairway had 16 stages. The stairways were flanked and isolated by slopes that ended in sizeable stone work hinders at the top. The highest point of the pyramid stood high and was beaten by a sanctuary, portions of which endure and have been reestablished. The dividers were worked from stuffed earth covered with stucco; a segment of the northern bit of the back divider still stands to a stature of . A wide stucco seat was worked against the back divider and a curved empty in the floor was presumably intended for the consuming of incense. The top of the sanctuary was probably going to have been covered. The third and last development stage was significantly bigger than the first forms of the pyramid. In its last structure the pyramid base estimated ; it had five corniced levels and just had a solitary stairway instead of the prior two.The stairway was flanked by two wide inclines, just the lower bit of the stairway and slopes endure. The highest point of the pyramid stood practically higher than the former form and safeguarded portions of the before sanctuary working in its infill; the upper stage has to a great extent crumpled and no follow stays of the last form of the sanctuary superstructure. Both the second and third forms of the pyramid were initially covered in stucco, portions of which were protected. New stucco was connected amid reclamation work to coordinate the first covering. Despite the fact that the pyramid was reestablished after it was exhumed, the 1976 Guatemala seismic tremor caused impressive harm and the upper part of the pyramid was diminished to rubble. 

An entombment was uncovered from before the mass of the most punctual variant of the pyramid. The related contributions incorporated various mud vessels, a neckband of little gold chimes and a copper hatchet. The most punctual metal antiques in the Maya locale have been dated to the Terminal Classic time frame (c.800-900); the nearness of metal ancient rarities related with the soonest development stage at Mixco Viejo (Jilotepeque Viejo) exhibits the limited ability to focus the site and proposes that every one of the three development stages succeeded each other moderately quickly. Further fired contributions were saved under both of the last two stages and a falsely disfigured skull was entombed under the focal pivot of the last form. 

Stage C2 faces Pyramid C1 and fringes the Group C Plaza. The stage is a long rectangular structure estimating (north-south by east-west) and involves the most noteworthy area of any structure at Mixco Viejo (Jilotepeque Viejo). The stage has two dimensions and has an all out tallness of , the lower of which has a noticeable cornice. The east side of the lower level has an inset stairway getting to the upper dimension. The upper dimension of the stage is recessed against the back of the lower level and has an intricate veneer with four access stairways isolated by corniced slopes. The whole stage was initially covered in stucco, of which just a couple of follows remain. On the upper dimension the stucco follows plot where dividers once stood, driving archeologists to reason that few private structures once remained on top. Stage C2 was based upon a before, shorter stage that had an exterior made out of slight pieces. All things considered, Platform C2 gave confined access to Pyramid C1. Various funerary urns were unearthed from the base of Platform C2. 

Structure C6 was a perception stage that shaped the south side of the East Plaza. It looked out southwards over the neighboring valley. 

Stage C7 is a L-formed stage that shuts the east side and upper east corner of the East Plaza. Steps run the whole length of the stage. 

Structure C8 is a private aggravate that was gotten to from the back street rushing toward the East Plaza from behind Pyramid C1. The passageway opened onto the back road from a porch arranged in the southern part of the compound. This yard was encompassed on the east, west and north sides by rooms, with the back road toward the south. It was stunned with stucco and Structure C8 was the main stuccoed private structure in the entire of the city. The north scope of rooms sponsored legitimately onto the gorge quickly toward the north of Group C; the lower part of the dividers of the west room and of half of the north room still stand. The west room was square while the north room was limited and most likely broadened the whole width of the yard. Wear checks in the stucco floor demonstrate that an entryway once got to the north room from the west. The workmanship of Structure C8 was of high caliber and shows that it was the living arrangement of an individual from the city's first class. Its vicinity to the extensive pyramid-sanctuary C1 has driven excavator Henri Lehmann to guess that it was at one time the place of the consecrated minister. 

Structure C11 was a little pyramid sanctuary in the lower (western) area of Group C. It was worked from little pieces of stone and confronted west with an entrance stairway flanked by inclines. The structure overlies a prior form that was constructed utilizing pumice. 

Structure C12 is a south-bound stage worked from pumice. It separates the West Plaza in two. The upper surface of the stage is set apart by a hover of consumed earth framed by the consuming of incense. 

Structure C13 is a stage shutting the southern portion of the west side of the West Plaza. 

Structure C14 is a stage in the lower some portion of Group C, near Pyramid C11. 

Gathering C' is a little gathering east of Group C; it is promptly south of Group B and borders it. 

Structure C'1 is an unexcavated hill. 

Structure C'2 is another unexcavated hill; it is littler than Structure C'1. 

Gathering D is a scattered gathering toward the east of Group B. 

Pyramid D1 is on the east side of the Group D square. The pyramid had three ventured levels raised upon a low base. It faces west towards the square and had a solitary access stairway flanked by inclining balustrades that end in vertical areas at the upper limits. The pyramid was of fine workmanship utilizing great cut stone chunks. Nonetheless, itw was ineffectively safeguarded and the southern part had mostly fell. The enduring segments of the structure enabled it to be precisely reestablished by archeologists. 

Stage D2 is on the north side of the Group D square; it has not been investegated by archeologists. 

Stage D3 is on the south side of the Group D square and has not been liable to archeological examination. 

Structure D4 is a little special stepped area in the focal point of the Group D court. 

Stage D5 is a south-bound range structure of incredible length with only two access stairways. Unearthings revealed various funerary urns kept under the back mass of the structure, the main precedent entombment urns being buried behind such a stage. 

Gathering E is situated toward the west of Group C. Gathering E is to a great extent encompassed by soak gorges; the occupants of the city slice the precipices to make them more extreme and progressively solid, and fortified them with a holding divider. Archeological examinations neglected to discover any entrance stairway through the holding divider to Group E. 

Pyramid E1 is situated on the east side of the Group E square and was the most imperative structure in Group E. The pyramid had three development stages, the most established of which was worked from pumice upon a characteristic high height and was observed to be very much protected amid unearthings of the site. This early stage was pressed with adjusted stones to give the infill to the second period of development. The second form of the pyramid was all around inadequately protected; unearthings revealed many stucco pieces yet were unfit to figure out which of the initial two development stages they had a place with. The third and last period of development was bigger than the previous variants of the structure and encased both them and the normal height whereupon they stood. The pyramid had four ventured levels upon a basal stage. It confronted west with an entrance stairway flanked by two slopes that ended in anticipating workmanship hinders at the top. A little special stepped area was uncovered at the base of the pyramid; two stones were discovered put upon it. One of these stones was ball-molded while the other was punctured and may have been a mace or club. Various funerary urns were uncovered at the base of the southern side of the pyramid. 

Structure E2 is a range structure on the north side of the Group E square. It has not been liable to archeological examination. 

Structure E3 is a square special raised area amidst the Group E court. It faces towards Pyramid E1. 

Structure E4 is a stage situated behind Pyramid E1 and encases the eastern side of the Group E square. It faces west onto the square and has two access stairways, both flanked by slopes worked from little pieces of stone and with cornices at the top. The stage dividers are of fine workmanship, being worked with well-cut and cautiously fitted pumice. The front part of the upper stage was cleared with stone sections, and a seat ran the whole length of the back of the stage. The earth floor between the clearing and the seat was found to have been scorched. An offering was exhumed from the focal pivot of the stage's base, it comprised of two ring-molded clubs set on either side of a stone ball. 

Stage E6 is arranged on the west side of the Group E square. It is generally worked from sporadically estimated, ineffectively cut stones. The stage faces east towards Pyramid E1 and has four access stairways. The stage once bolstered transitory homes; these were worked from maize stalks bound together with mud, as prove by the engraving of the maize stalks in the parts of dirt divider recouped amid unearthings. The stage itself was once secured with stucco. 

Gathering E' is a bunch of little structures in the trough between the ridges supporting Groups C and E. 

Gathering F is toward the west of Group E. Hill F is the primary structure inside Group F. It slants step by step away toward the west and was not effectively faultless on that side, anyway it lay outside the solid holding dividers of the fortification and seems to have been a perception stage covering the western go to the city. A holding divider upheld the hill over the pass and a round earth stage upon the hill may have bolstered a transitory watchtower. 

Gathering G comprises of various little structures unstable along the edge toward the north of Group A. 

Gathering H is a little gathering toward the upper east of Group A. Structure H1 is a stage that utilizes a characteristic hill as its base. 

Gathering I is otherwise called the Campana Group. It is the northernmost gathering at Mixco Viejo (Jilotepeque Viejo). 

Gathering J is a bunch of little structures promptly southwest of Group An and connecting it. 

Three little surrenders are found in the sides of the edge supporting the remains of the city; archeological examinations have uncovered that two of these caverns were falsely changed in days of yore. 

Cueva de La ("Lola's Cave") is arranged underneath Group A, close to the bank of the Pancaco River as it streams toward the northwest of the vestiges. The cavern is profound and wide; for the greater part of its length it is high. The cavern had been misleadingly extended and elevated. Amid the downpour season water separating through the ground underneath the city streams out as a little cascade at the base of the cavern. The cavern was utilized for stately exercises, identified with the nearness of the spring inside it and the way that the dividers are shaped from green phyllite; greenstone was consecrated to the Maya and was related with water and ripeness. Ceremonial exercises in the cavern have proceeded into current occasions, with formal flames being lit inside. 

Cueva del Murciăšlago ("Cave of the Bat") is situated at the southern outrageous of the site. It is profound; at its most stretched out point it is wide and the cavern is high. It was falsely extended to allow get to was as yet utilized for Maya services in the late twentieth century, when archeologists discovered late proof of action. 

A substantial amount of funerary urns have been uncovered from the bases of structures; the expired were incinerated and their fiery debris gathered in the urns. The sides of the urns were punctured with three openings, maybe to speak to the eyes and mouth of the expired. The urns were enhanced with polychrome themes as profoundly stylised snake designs painted in dark, red and cream; this style of Maya earthenware production has been marked as Chinautla Polychrome after the site where it was first distinguished. The Postclassic Maya custom of entombing the incinerated stays of the expired in urns was limited to the world class; everyday citizens where covered in basic tombs outside the downtown area. In Jilotepeque Viejo urns were generally covered under the front of stage bases or under the sides of pyramids and special raised areas. This was not a general practice among the good country Maya in the Postclassic and speaks to a convention special to the city. Funerary urns have been discovered entombed under all the foremost squares of the city. Around equivalent extents of urns were entombed under stages and under the stylized design spoken to by pyramids and raised areas, in spite of the fact that it is difficult to state if those people covered under religious engineering had contrasting jobs than those covered under mainstream design. 

An aggregate of 52 urns were exhumed from the vestiges of Jilotepeque Viejo; 8 of these were crushed by the 1976 tremor leaving 44 accessible for study. Twelve of these were in the accumulation of the Musăše de l'Homme in Paris for around thirty years; These urns, together with every other relic from Mixco Viejo (Jilotepeque Viejo), were repatriated to Guatemala in 1998. Every urn contained the incinerated stays of a solitary grown-up. These gave off an impression of being developed or old grown-ups; the remaining parts of youthful grown-ups were eminently missing, showing that world class warriors were covered in some other way. The urns themselves spoke to an assortment of good country artistic sorts. Examination of bone sections in the incinerated remains demonstrates that the whole body was singed with no extraordinary treatment for the skull, in spite of the fact that the offering of a skull was unearthed from Pyramid C1. Enduring skull parts demonstrated the act of counterfeit skull misshapening among the first class occupants of the city. The remaining parts of creature bones were discovered blended among a critical segment of the substance of the urns; where recognizable these included deer bones and those of various feathered creature species, especially parrots and winged creatures of prey. 

Just six of the urns contained related funerary contributions: