Galactica (crazy ride) 

Galactica (some time ago known as Air) is a flying crazy ride situated in the Forbidden Valley zone of Alton Towers event congregation in Staffordshire, England. Recently known as Air, it is the primary flying napkin fabricated by Bolliger and Mabillard. Visitors ride in an inclined position lying chest down and experience the sentiment of trip by "flying" near the ground, under trails, and barely past trees and shakes. 

The thrill ride initially opened as Air on 16 March 2002. Following the end of the 2015 season, the ride experienced repair and revived as Galactica on 24 March 2016. It includes a track, achieves a top speed of , and appeared a devoted computer generated simulation experience, despite the fact that this has since been evacuated. 

Alton Towers imagined the idea of a flying crazy ride in 1990, twelve years before Air in the end opened. Following the opening of Nemesis in 1994, a flying napkin was arranged by the recreation center to open in 1998, however was deferred because of mechanical restrictions. Amid its advancement, Alton Towers showcased the ride as Secret Weapon 5 (contracted to SW5), following the naming example built up for past significant park improvements. The ride was created to some degree by ride architect John Wardley, the maker of numerous attractions at Alton Towers and other previous Tussauds Group amusement parks. 

Development of Air started in mid-2001. Soon thereafter, Alton Towers at first publicized the new rollercoaster as a "cutting edge Aerial Inversion Ride"; along these lines uncovering the name Air. 

In mid 2002, testing of Air started with unique accident test fakers. At the season of opening, Air tied with Oblivion as the most costly ride at Alton Towers, at an expense of Âł12 million. A Âł4.5 million advertising effort for the ride included advertisements based around the ride's motto, "take on the position". Air authoritatively opened to the general population on 16 March 2002. On opening, Alton Towers went into a five-year sponsorship understanding for the ride with Cadbury Heroes. 

In June 2015, the recreation center presented an arranging application to make adjustments to the station building and retail space. This proposed including another photograph opportunity into the line, encasing the station working with new dividers, and developing extra theming components around the ride territory. This was notwithstanding a before arranging application to change over the current ride shop into an eatery. In October 2015, the main special material was posted on the Alton Towers site, encouraging visitors to "plan for another flight" and to "watch this space". 

On 12 January 2016, Alton Towers declared that Air would be re-themed as Galactica for the 2016 season and would incorporate on-ride computer generated reality headsets recreating a ride through the universe. The declaration was made at an occasion held at the Science Museum. Each seat on the thrill ride was at first fitted with a Samsung Gear VR headset and pocket. The augmented simulation experience was discretionary, as visitors could ride without utilizing the headsets. A limited time site was likewise discharged clarifying more data about the ride and its new storyline. In late February 2016, the recreation center reported that the official opening date would be 24 March 2016. 

For the 2018 season, the augmented simulation headsets were diminished to the back three columns of each train just, with visitors picking whether to utilize the VR or not when they entered the station. 

On 17 March, 2019, Alton Towers reported that the computer generated experience headsets have been expelled, because of visitor input. Regardless of this, the ride will keep up its Galactica name and subject. 

At the season of opening, Galactica was the tallest ride at Alton Towers, standing tall. The ride achieves a top speed of . Riders can encounter a g-power of up to 3.5g while on the ride. One cycle of the ride keeps going around one moment and forty seconds. 

Galactica highlights a double stage stacking station, allowing three trains to work at the same time. Each train has seven vehicles, with every vehicle conveying four riders one next to the other in a solitary column. This design takes into consideration up to 1400 riders for every hour, despite the fact that this was intensely diminished when VR was in activity. 

Riders board a train taking a seat, in a comparable style to upset crazy rides. Riders are controlled through a cushioned over-the-bear outfit and a lap bar. At the lower legs, two folds hold the legs in position and close as the saddle locks into spot. After a train is completely bolted and checked, riders are raised into the flying position and the train leaves the station. From 2016 to 2018, riders had the alternative of wearing computer generated simulation headsets, which were connected to the restrictions. 

Galactica leaves the station and rises a chain lift slope. The ride's first drop plunges to one side, before ascending back up and flying through the ride's highlight theming component, a gateway, which connects to the ride's space subject. Pursued by this, riders are abandoned the inclined position onto their backs. The liner at that point plays out a huge upward left turn before winding once more, returning riders to the inclined position. In the wake of leaving from the lie-to-fly component, Galactica goes underneath a little gorge before pitching up, into a tight turn over the square region. A 360 degrees inline contort is followed up by a progression of straight flying, and a few turns and dunks in the track. The train at that point halts on the brake keep running before coming back to one of the station's two stations. 

The Tussauds Group, proprietors of Alton Towers in the mid 2000s, guaranteed that Air added to the recreation center's solid execution in 2002 and 2003. 

In "Beguilement Today"s yearly Golden Ticket Awards, Air was positioned in the main 50 steel exciting rides various occasions following its opening. It crested at position 24 out of 2003, preceding dropping to position 34 out of 2004 and 36 of every 2005. In 2006, it tied for position 49 with another Bolliger and Mabillard flying liner, . It has not showed up in the main 50 since until 2015 it crested at 38. 

In Mitch Hawker's overall Best Roller Coaster Poll, Air topped at position 36 in its presentation year. The ride's positioning in consequent surveys is appeared in the table beneath.