GT Advance Championship Racing 

GT Advance Championship Racing (known as Advance GTA in Japan) is a hustling amusement created by MTO and distributed by THQ. It was a dispatch title for the Game Boy Advance, and was discharged in Japan on March 21, 2001, in North America on June 11, 2001, and in Europe on June 22, 2001. The diversion's continuation, "", was discharged on June 30, 2002 in North America. 

"GT Advance" highlights forty-five Japanese vehicles and spots the player in races on thirty-two tracks. Because of positive response to the diversion in Japan, THQ acquired distributing rights for the North American and European discharges to the amusement after a revealed offering war, and included a questionable secret key spare framework into the amusement to cut expenses. 

The amusement was gotten with for the most part positive audits from pundits that lauded the diversion for its fun ongoing interaction, yet THQ was scrutinized by most analysts for adding passwords to the amusement when the Japanese rendition had battery-supported recoveries. 

"GT Advance Championship Racing" is an adjustable encounter, including 48 vehicles from 8 vehicle makers, and 32 courses. A portion of the autos highlighted in the diversion are solely found in Asia, for example, the Nissan Cube. The courses fluctuate among cleared and earth streets, requiring the player to adjust their heading to meet the states of the course they're driving on. 

The amusement's title mode highlights four dimensions of play, three measures of fluctuating dimensions, and an unlockable "kart hustling mode". Overhauls earned through ongoing interaction can be added to the player's vehicle, and now and again, they can change the physical appearance of the vehicle. The amusement contains multiplayer support, enabling two individuals to play against one another utilizing a Game Link Cable. 

Controls are basic, with the An and B catches controlling the player's gas and brakes individually. The R and L secure change the vehicle or down a gear in manual control, and the D-Pad controls the vehicle's directing. The diversion requires the player to ace the powerslide procedure to slip around corners and to diminish their lap time. 

The streets in the amusement are painted on a level plane, which enables the diversion to advance at a smooth rate, yet makes it harder for the player to see up and coming turns in the street. The issue can be helped by playing through a track on numerous occasions to pick up recognition with the turns in a course. The vehicles are rendered through sprite outlines, giving the impression of 3D designs in the amusement. 

The Japanese form of the diversion, "Advance GTA", had spare help. Be that as it may, THQ hauled the battery RAM out of the North American and European arrivals of the diversion, and used passwords to spare information. The framework powers players of the North American and European discharges to enter a sixteen digit code comprising of upper and lowercase letters, numbers, and images into the diversion to recover their information. Numerous pundits accused THQ for what was seen to be a cost-cutting measure. It was the main significant change from the Japanese adaptation of the amusement. 

MTO started improvement on "GT Advance Championship Racing" about a year prior to the arrival of the diversion in Japan. The diversion was first declared on August 18, 2000, under the name of "Pocket GT Advance". Except for another secret word spare framework, tweaking was kept to a base for the North American form of the diversion. The decision was made in the Japanese rendition to utilize for the most part English in the diversion so it would be playable outside Japan. 

The Japanese rendition of the amusement, "Advance GTA", was adulated by pundits and the expectation for the North American and European arrivals of the diversion developed. A detailed offering war between United States distributing organizations to discharge the amusement in the US started after the positive criticism from the Japanese rendition. It was accounted for a month thereafter that THQ had picked up the distributing rights for the diversion's North American and European discharges. 

"GT Advance Championship Racing" accumulated acclaim from faultfinders for its general interactivity, yet the incorporation of a secret phrase spare framework by THQ into the North American and European arrivals of the amusement was vigorously censured. IGN's Craig Harris applauded the top notch illustrations motor and the engaging powerslide framework, yet seen that concerning the secret word framework, "... a few players (myself included) could conceivably surrender in sicken with what THQ has done to the diversion." GameSpot saw that, ""GT Advance" is, at its center, an exceptionally strong and graphically noteworthy dashing amusement." Despite lauding the interactivity, in any case, GameSpot prescribed that players purchase a Japanese import adaptation of the diversion rather, since it was in English and incorporated a battery spare component. Eurogamer composed that despite the fact that "GT Advance" was hampered by passwords, "... you should possess GT Advance somehow, as current problem excepted; it's a sterling case of handheld hustling done legitimately." 

Reacting to reactions of the secret key spare framework, THQ later re-instated the battery spare component into the two spin-offs of the diversion, "GT Advance 2: Rally Racing", and "".