You Don't Know Anything 

"You Don't Know Anything" is a tune by American outside the box musical gang Ivy. It was discharged by Atlantic Records on April 29, 1999 as the fourth and last single from their second studio collection, "Loft Life" (1997). The single was made accessible solely in Europe and highlighted a similar two B-sides as past single, "This Is the Day", which had been discharged by 550 Music in Austria. The track was composed by Dominique Durand, Adam Schlesinger and Andy Chase while generation was taken care of by the last two and Peter Nashel. 

Discharged nearby "This Is the Day", "You Don't Know Anything" got advancement by Atlantic Records after the previous track was incorporated on the soundtrack for the 1998 film, "There's Something About Mary". The account got commonly ideal surveys from music pundits who contrasted the tune with crafted by Irish shake bunch My Bloody Valentine. 

"You Don't Know Anything" was composed by Ivy band individuals Dominique Durand, Adam Schlesinger and Andy Chase. The creation of the track was taken care of by Chase and Schlesinger, with extra generation given by Peter Nashel. Musically, "You Don't Know Anything" is a pop shake/non mainstream shake melody, likewise fusing components of independent pop and guitar agrees. Expressively, the tune talks about a sweetheart being "confused" and "in the off-base". 

The single was intensely contrasted with My Bloody Valentine; in their audit of the track, Sputnikmusic expressed that it "falls off like a My Bloody Valentine tune with comprehensible vocals, with a sliding, reverb overwhelming snare and pounding drums", while AllMusic author Jack Rabid drew comparative correlations. Patrick Carmosino of "West Net" expressed that with "You Don't Know Anything", Ivy "have a non mainstream ethic shake side that compliments their pop sensibilities to the tee". 

The account was discharged all the while with the arrival of the single "This Is the Day"; this happened after the last track was highlighted in the 1998 film, "There's Something About Mary". "You Don't Know Anything" was discharged as a CD single solely in European nations; the CD included two B-diverts, "Late" and "Sweet Mary". 

"You Don't Know Anything" got commonly positive surveys from music pundits. Stephen Thompson of "The A.V. Club" adulated the track and "Condo Life" for "sound[ing] smoothly beautiful and mannered". An analyst from Sputnikmusic likewise delighted in the account, considering it a "mid-collection emerge", while AllMusic named the tune "a knockout" and lauded it for permitting "the guitars [to] get mean". Analyst Scott Floman was increasingly blended with his audit, finding the track to "go by enjoyably however unremarkably". 

Credits and work force adjusted from "You Don't Know Anything" liner notes and Andy Chase's discography.