The Best Thing (Ivy melody) 

"The Best Thing" is a melody by American band Ivy on their second studio collection, "Loft Life" (1997). Discharged on September 12, 1997 by Atlantic Records, it was the band's real mark debut single and filled in as the parent collection's lead single. The track was composed by Dominique Durand, Adam Schlesinger and Andy Chase, and was delivered by the last two. A pop tune, "The Best Thing" is joined by a few guitars and a console. 

It was disseminated to radio stations for airplay in September 1997, corresponding with the arrival of two CD singles. It was additionally discharged as a 7" single in Italy, where it was matched with the B-derail "Caretaker in Manhattan", performed by the American band Lilys. music faultfinders applauded "The Best Thing", with a few calling it one of the catchiest tracks on "Condo Life". 

"The Best Thing" was taken from Ivy's second studio collection, "Condo Life", which was discharged on October 7, 1997 by Atlantic Records. It was recorded in 1997 in New York City at three distinctive chronicle studios. The single was discharged in three arrangements; the business CD single incorporates the collection variant of "The Best Thing" while a limited time Italy 7" jukebox single, discharged by East West Records, utilized Ivy's melody as the A-side and Lilys "A Nanny in Manhattan" as the B-side. Another special CD single was likewise made containing the "Video Remix" of the track. 

As per the liner notes of the limited time discharge, Atlantic Records charged "The Best Thing" as Ivy's legitimate presentation single. Following its conveyance as a physical single, "The Best Thing" was overhauled to current shake and present day grown-up contemporary radio stations starting September 12, 1997. The record name had trusted that Ivy would get extensive radio airplay, in light of melodic patterns amid a similar timeframe when "Loft Life" was planned to be discharged. Michael Krumper, the VP of item advancement for Atlantic Records, anticipated this, given "there are various records that have a comparable vibe to Ivy". 

Preceding the planned discharge date for "Loft Life", Ivy was booked for a limited time radio visit in September 1997. Around this equivalent time, "Bulletin" reported that a music video for "The Best Thing" would total recording and creation before the finish of that month; be that as it may, an official video was never discharged for the single, in spite of another "Board" article depicting arrangements for taping in November of that equivalent year. 

"The Best Thing" was composed by Dominique Durand, Adam Schlesinger and Andy Chase, with the last two additionally filling in as makers. Paul Q. Kolderie and Sean Slade contributed as the blenders, with Matthew Ellard filling in as an associate blender; Bob Ludwig finished the acing and James Iha contributed backing vocals to the track. It was recorded in New York City in 1997 at three account studios: The Place, Duotone Studios, and Compositions. A pop tune, it highlights "undulating atmospherics" and a "punk-ish guitar", with a client from Sputnikmusic remarking that it might have been affected by the American band Pixies. Its creation comprises of an "energetically strummed" acoustic guitar and a triplet-playing console. Durand "stretch[es] out every syllable" while singing in a style that is reminiscent of the German performer Nico amid the verses: "She's driving quick/She took the family vehicle/She's getting high/She's never slipped up until this point". As the theme starts, she rehashes "It's the best thing/She's at any point had" consistently close by a few guitars. 

"The Best Thing" was commended by music pundits. AllMusic's Jack Rabid was incredibly positive, considering it a "genuine single with a chorale that is to swoon and murmur for". Vickie Gilmer and Ira Robbins from "Pant Press" portrayed the melody as a "drawing in opener" and commended it and collection track "I've Got a Feeling" for being snappy. Plain Tortorici from MTV News concurred, and anticipated that it would likely "prevail at radio whenever given an opportunity". Calling it "arousing", Stephen Thompson from "The A.V. Club" guaranteed that the remainder of "Loft Life" does not coordinate the nature of "The Best Thing", yet additionally expressed that the whole collection "never slips excessively far" in light of the fact that the final result incorporates "flawlessly classy exhibitions". 

Credits and staff adjusted from "Loft Life".