Cottalango Leon 

Cottalango Leon (brought into the world 1971) is an Indian-American PC designs expert who won the Academy Award for logical and specialized accomplishment mutually with Sam Richards and J. Robert Ray in 2016. 

Leon won the Academy Award for "the structure, building and ceaseless advancement" of Sony Pictures Imageworks itView innovation, a computerized 3D film survey programming. Leon took a shot at the itView innovation for a long time as the main patron. 

Educated in India, Leon is an Arizona State University graduate. He has worked at Sony Pictures Imageworks since 1996, and has added to the creation of a few economically effective movies, including the "Insect Man film arrangement" and the "Men In Black film arrangement". 

Leon was conceived at his mom's family home in Thoothukudi, Tamil Nadu in 1971. The two his folks – mother Rajam Mariasingam and father Loorthu – were elementary teachers. At the point when Leon was youthful, his folks moved from the south of Tamil Nadu to Coimbatore. Leon's initial years were spent in this city – a spot despite everything he visits like clockwork. 

Leon went to the Government High School at Kallapalayam, a town in the Sultanpet Block of Coimbatore. In the wake of contemplating here till evaluation VII, he examined from evaluation VIII to review XII at Kadri Mills High School in Coimbatore. Amid his youth, Leon wound up inspired by the subjects of arithmetic and science, and furthermore created, according to him, a distinct fascination for "the visual part of motion pictures". In this way, Leon went to school at the PSG College of Technology from 1988 till 1992, finishing his Bachelor of Engineering certificate in software engineering. He finished his M.S in software engineering from Arizona State University in 1996, work in PC illustrations. 

Leon wedded Roopa in 2001. Roopa additionally has a place with southern Tamil Nadu, having lived there till her marriage to Leon. The couple have a little girl Shruthi and live in Culver City. 

In the wake of graduating, Leon joined the New Delhi firm Softek LLC and worked with them for a long time till 1994. According to Leon, amid this time, he wound up roused by "Jurassic Park" in the wake of watching the film and chose to seek after his profession in the advances utilized in its creation. Subsequent to finishing the graduate degree at Arizona State University in 1996, Leon worked for a brief span as a computer game developer with DreamWorks Interactive, before joining Sony Pictures Imageworks in 1996, where he keeps attempting to date, as of now holding the situation of Principal Software Engineer. 

At Imageworks, according to Leon, he was approached to build up an improved advanced film audit programming as an option in contrast to a then existing programming. Leon discharged the underlying rendition inside two months of having been doled out the activity; in the wake of getting positive criticism from the specialists utilizing the product, Leon continued refreshing different functionalities of the product throughout the years. This computerized 3D film audit programming, itView, drove Leon to get an Academy Award in 2016. Leon makes reference to working alone on the undertaking for a long time, and that he was after some time given a group when the task accomplished critical development. In a 2016 media talk with, Leon says that he took a shot at the itView innovation for a long time as the central benefactor. 

Until this point in time, Leon has chipped away at a few economically fruitful movies, including "Stuart Little", the "Creepy crawly Man film arrangement", the "Men In Black film arrangement", "Overcast with a Chance of Meatballs", "The Smurfs", "Inn Transylvania", and "Open Season". 

Leon, at 44 years old, won the 2016 Academy Award for logical and specialized accomplishment for "the plan, building and ceaseless advancement" of Sony Pictures Imageworks itView innovation. In a function hung on 13 February 2016 at Beverly Wilshire Hotel in Beverly Hills, California, Leon got the Academy Award together with Sam Richards and J. Robert Ray. According to the Academy, these arrangement of honors are gave to people who have contributed fundamentally after some time – and not really in the previous year – to the movie business. 

Richard Edlund, Chair of the Scientific and Technical Awards Committee at the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences adulated the "exceptional, imaginative work" of awardees, including that their commitments "have additionally extended filmmakers’ innovative opportunities..." The Academy's honor reference commended itView's API module and differed functionalities, referencing that "itView gives an instinctive and adaptable inventive audit condition that can be conveyed internationally for profoundly effective coordinated effort." Leon said that "the honor was not absolutely unforeseen" however that it felt "great to be perceived by the Academy and the more extensive industry."