Mersea Fort 

Mersea Fort, otherwise called Cudmore Grove Blockhouse, was a cannons post set up by Henry VIII on the East Mersea coast in 1543. It shaped piece of the King's Device program to shield against attack from France and the Holy Roman Empire, and guarded the River Colne that prompted the town of Colchester. It was triangular fit as a fiddle, with earthwork dividers and three bastions to hold gunnery. It was grounded in 1552, however was brought once more into utilization a few times throughout the following century and saw administration amid the Second English Civil War of 1648. The fortification facilitated a chief of naval operations' office court to oversea the nearby clam exchange, until the frailty of the site constrained the court to move to the Moot Hall in Colchester amidst the eighteenth century. Another weapon battery was worked at the fortress amid the Napoleonic Wars, however the stronghold at that point fell into decrease and was broadly harmed by the development of an ocean divider along the coast. The remaining parts of the earthworks were exhumed by archeologists somewhere in the range of 2002 and 2003. 

Mersea Fort was worked as a result of global strains between England, France and the Holy Roman Empire in the last long periods of the rule of King Henry VIII. Customarily the Crown had left beach front safeguards to nearby rulers and networks, just playing an unassuming job in structure and looking after fortresses, and keeping in mind that France and the Empire stayed in strife, oceanic attacks were normal yet a genuine intrusion of England appeared to be improbable. Unobtrusive protections based around basic brick houses and towers existed in the south-west and along the Sussex coast, with a couple of progressively great works in the north of England, yet as a rule the strongholds were restricted in scale. 

In 1533, Henry broke with Pope Paul III over the invalidation of his long-standing marriage to Catherine of Aragon. Catherine was the auntie of Charles V, the Holy Roman Emperor, who accepting the invalidation as an individual affront. This brought about France and the Empire announcing a collusion against Henry in 1538, and the Pope urging the two nations to assault England. An intrusion of England seemed certain. Accordingly, Henry issued a request, called a "gadget", in 1539, giving guidelines for the "safeguard of the domain in time of attack" and the development of posts along the English coastline. 

The region of Essex was not a need for new speculation, however the town of Harwich was strengthened in 1539 and further new fortresses, including Mersea Fort, were worked along the coast in 1543, under the bearing of Richard Lee and Richard Cawarden, at an expected absolute expense of Âł2,717. The fortification was situated on salt marshland on the south side of the River Colne, and would have ensured the passage to the estuary, cooperating with the new strong houses worked at St Osyth and Brightlingsea. Mersea was triangular, with earthwork dividers between roughly long, further secured by "maunds", round bushels loaded up with earth, and a guarded discard with a drawbridge. On every one of the three corners was a roundabout bastion lodging up to four firearms. Structures in the yard would have housed the army, which contained a chief, a lieutenant, two officers, a doorman and somewhere in the range of three and six mounted guns heavy armament specialists. There was an adjacent wharf, most likely for use by the fortress. 

In 1552 the stronghold was decommissioned, however was along these lines recommissioned by Mary I. Notwithstanding the post's military job, it facilitated a court to regulate the oysterfields along the East Mersea coast, which were especially rewarding however in danger of overfishing. In 1566, Colchester acquainted new standards with oversee the shellfish exchange, which were authorized by a chief of naval operations' office court, held when important in Mersea Fort; the area was picked in order to exhibit the town's position as far as possible up to the highest point of the estuary. A study in 1586 demonstrated the post had been surrendered by the military by and by: the barriers were in a poor express, the weapons' barrels were stopped up with earth and the site had been involved by an older lady. It was brought over into utilization in 1588 and 1631 to safeguard against first the Spanish Armada and afterward the Dunkirker privateers. 

Amid the First English Civil War between the supporters of King Charles I and Parliament, Mersea Fort saw no activity; after the triumph of Parliament in 1646, the fortification's battalion was deactivated. Strife flared again in 1648 with the episode of the Second English Civil War, and Colchester was taken by the Royalists. The town was promptly attacked by General Thomas Fairfax, who immediately seized Mersea Fort, which controlled the supply course by stream into Colchester, before the Royalists could do as such. The fortress had contained five bits of big guns: two culverins, two sakers and one drake. A Royalist attacking gathering of 300 fighters was sent to recover the fortification, yet without progress. 

Mersea Fort was set under the direction of Captain William Burrell. Weapons and ammo were kept there in the event of a new insubordination, with a battalion of 36 men, which was incidentally fortified by an extra squadron of horsemen and 50 infantry in July 1650. Fixes were produced using 1651 onwards, and new convenience was built for the post's heavy armament specialists. After an attack alarm in 1655, Mersea was briefly used to detain Royalists associated with arranging an insurrection against Oliver Cromwell's Commonwealth government. The fortification was then deactivated by Cromwell as a component of his endeavors to decrease protection costs; Burrell was requested to destroy the post yet the request was never completed, mostly as a result of the reasonable challenges and in light of restriction from the proprietor of the land. The admiral's office court kept on being held in the stronghold, in spite of the fact that it demonstrated a lot harder to authorize the fishery rules in view of the political unrest. 

By the eighteenth century, Mersea Fort was in remnants. The fishery rules were fortified by new enactment in 1758, which made a court of conservancy to oversea the clam stocks. Authoritatively, this court should sit at the fortress, yet rather than utilizing the now frail earthworks, it started to meet in Colchester's Moot Hall. Rather, a function started to happen every year at the Mersea Stone, close to the fortress, including nearby dignitaries and broad eating and drinking. The fortification was recommissioned amid the Napoleonic Wars toward the beginning of the nineteenth century, and another firearm battery was developed disregarding the ocean, furnished with six 24-pounder (10.9â kg) weapons. After this the post was relinquished by and by. An ocean divider was worked along the coast from the get-go in the century, slicing through the south-east side of the stronghold. The enactment on clams was improved by Parliament in 1870, which disbanded the past court structure and disjoined the noteworthy connection with Mersea Fort. A guarded pill-box was built at the château amid the Second World War. 

In the 21st century, the remaining parts of the site are ensured under UK law as a booked landmark. The site was overviewed in 1982 and unearthings were completed somewhere in the range of 2002 and 2003, breaking down enduring timber structures that had been uncovered by beach front disintegration.