Mint (melody) 

"Mint" is a melody recorded by Japanese vocalist Namie Amuro. It was discharged on May 18, 2016 in Japan and May 27, 2016 in Taiwan as a CD single, DVD single, and worldwide on May 18 as a computerized download by Avex Trax, Avex Taiwan and Amuro's own name Dimension Point. It additionally filled in as Amuro's fifth non-collection maxi single, after the arrival of her December 2015 single "Celebrity central", and highlights the B-side melody "Babble". The track was composed by Andreas Oberg, Emyli, Maria Marcus, and Tiger, while generation was taken care of by Oberg and Marcus. 

Musically, "Mint" is a move melody that joins melodic components of contemporary R&B, EDM, and shake music. The expressive substance for both "Mint" and "Babble" incorporates English and Japanese language, with the previous talking about subjects of desire and love. "Mint" got positive surveys from music commentators. A few pundits recognized the creation of the track, complimenting the piece and Amuro's vocal execution. 

Industrially, the tune performed reasonably on the Oricon Singles Chart in Japan, achieving number four. Be that as it may, it performed better on the Japan Hot 100, achieving number two and was confirmed Platinum by the Recording Industry Association of Japan (RIAJ) for advanced offers of 250,000 units. A going with music video was coordinated by Naokazu Mitsuishi, which shows Amuro and 30 female reinforcement artists in a dull blue room. To advance the single, it was utilized as the signature tune for the Japanese TV show arrangement "Bokuno Yabai Tsuma" (meant "My Sick Wife"). Nearby this, "Mint" will be incorporated into the setlist for her 2016 Live Style show visit in Japan. 

After the arrival of Amuro's twelfth studio collection "Genic" (2015), she began to discharge non-collection maxi singles. The principal passage was "Celebrity central", which was performed through her Asian-wide show visit name Livegenic 2015–2016. Notwithstanding its execution, it didn't show up on the live discharge "Livegenic 2015-2016". At that point on March 31, music production Jame World affirmed the arrival of another single on May 18, which was uncovered to be "Mint". It was affirmed on Amuro's site that "Mint" would be utilized as the official signature tune to the Fuji TV Japanese TV dramatization arrangement "Bokuno Yabai Tsuma". The creation group for the TV arrangement moved toward Amuro's record mark, Dimension Point, to take an interest in account a tune for the show, which she affirmed. As to tune, Amuro remarked; "I'm grateful to have gotten the idea to give the signature melody. It's a quick paced, exciting track told from a ladies' viewpoint. I'll be upbeat if this melody caught the quintessence of the show." 

"Mint" was composed by Andreas Oberg, Emyli, Maria Marcus, and Tiger, while creation was taken care of by Oberg and Marcus; it was likewise made by Oberg, Emyli, and Marcus. As indicated by Amuro, she depicted the piece and generation of the tune as "exciting". Musically, it is a move tune that fuses melodic components of contemporary R&B, EDM, and shake music. Composing for "Amusement Weekly", Joey Nolfi depicted "Mint" as an "a brilliantly whacky blend of electric, surf-shaking guitars, R&B drones, and a throbbing EDM breakdown,". A staff part at Tokyo Girls Update analysised the arrangement, and noticed the utilization of "hard-hitting beats and some slithery guitar lines". A staff part from Japanese magazine "Cd Journal" noticed the melodic component of grime in its organization. The expressive substance for both "Mint" and "Talk" incorporates English and Japanese language. 

A month prior to its underlying discharge on May 18, "Mint" had spilled completely on the web. The single was discharged in Japan and Taiwan as a CD single, DVD single, and as a computerized EP by Avex Trax and Amuro's own mark Dimension Point. Each of the three releases incorporated the typical forms and instrumentals of "Mint" and the B-derail "Talk". "Talk" was composed by Andreas Oberg, Emyli, Maria Marcus, and Tiger, and was portrayed by a "Compact disc Journal" staff part as an "upbeat house" melody. The reward DVD incorporated the music video of "Mint". On May 18, first press issues at CDJapan.com offered a B2-estimate blurb of the CD work of art. The CD and computerized fine art includes a nearby of Amuro in a gold dress, while the CD and DVD pack has a body shot with her holding a gold shoe. 

Upon its discharge, "Mint" got positive audits from music commentators. A staff part at Tokyo Girls Update delighted in the tune, and felt that the instrumentation complimented Amuro's vocals well. Additionally, a part from "Compact disc Journal" delighted in the tune's music, and adulated how other melodic classes, for example, electronic move and grime music in the tune complimented the general J-pop impact. The analyst additionally featured the B-divert "Talk" as a decent commitment to the maxi discharge. A Japanese commentator from Amazon likewise praised the generation and organization, marking it as "paramount" and "noteworthy". "Amusement Weekly" author Joey Nolfi chose it among six different melodies as a standout amongst his best tracks of Summer 2016. With this determination, he remarked that the measure of melodic types, for example, EDM and R&B "showcas[es] the sonic bravura that makes J-Pop the absolute most intriguing music on earth." 

Economically, "Mint" was a moderate accomplishment in Japan. The melody appeared at number four on the Oricon Singles Chart, selling 28,136 units in its first week. Notwithstanding it being one of Amuro's least first week deals for a solitary in her profession, the single checked 22 years of top ten singles discharged by Amuro, one of the main refinements by any performance craftsman in Japan. It slipped to number 21 the next week, selling 5,245 units, one of Amuro's biggest drops on the Oricon diagram. Before the finish of May 2016, it was positioned at number 10 on their Monthly outline and sold 33,381 units. It went through nine weeks in the Top 200 diagram, and sold 46,231 by October 2017. 

Carefully, "Mint" and "Gab" was an accomplishment in Japan. On the Japan Hot 100 diagram, facilitated by "Bulletin", the previous track entered at number 56 on the fourth week, while the last entered at 48 on the last seven day stretch of May 2016. Amid that equivalent last week in May, "Mint" achieved number four and the top spot on the "Board" Japan Singles Sales Chart, and the Billboard Japan Radio Songs graph. The next week, the single slipped to number five on the graph, and fell outside the best 10 amid its seventh week. In June 2016, "Mint" was confirmed Gold by the Recording Industry Association of Japan (RIAJ) for advanced offers of 100,000 units; this is her first confirmation since her 2014 single "More splendid Day". 

A going with music video was coordinated by Naokazu Mitsuishi. It opens with a long shot of Amuro and 30 or more female reinforcement artists in a dull lit blue room. Amid the main section and pre-tune, Amuro is seen strolling around the artists and sings the melody. When the chorale begins, Amuro takes of her cape and moves in a little suit, alongside the artists. Entomb cut scenes include Amuro on a vast stage with a long pink dress and blossom crown, singing the track in a further separation among her and the artists. The video got positive surveys from productions, including an evaluate by Arama Japan, who named it "straightforward" yet "beautiful" and "great". To advance the single, "Mint" was utilized as the signature melody for the Japanese TV dramatization arrangement "Bokuno Yabai Tsuma" (meant "My Sick Wife"). Close by this, "Mint" will be incorporated into the setlist for her 2016 Live Style show visit, to be held in Japan. 

Credits adjusted from the CD liner notes of "Mint"';