Fire lover (Oh Land tune) 

"Fire lover" is a tune by Danish vocalist musician Oh Land, taken from her third studio collection "Wish Bone" (2013). It was discharged carefully as the collection's second single on 2 September 2013 by Tusk or Tooth and A:larm Music, only in Denmark. The track was composed by Oh Land and Jimmy Harry, and delivered by David Andrew Sitek. A mix of funk, pop, and soul music, "Fire lover" includes a snare with dreary verses and was contrasted with crafted by a few craftsmen, including the Cardigans, 

Robyn, and Phoenix. 

Getting a blended reaction from music pundits, "Fire lover" was featured for being a solid track on "Wish Bone" however blamed for being mediocre compared to her past singles. A music video for the single was discharged on 13 September 2013 and coordinated by Rasmus Weng Karlsen and Jasper Carlberg. It includes the artist in an assortment of outfits. 

"Fire lover" is taken from Oh Land's third studio collection, "Wish Bone" (2013). The collection's second single in general, "Fire lover" was discharged as a computerized download on 2 September 2013 by Tusk or Tooth Records and A:larm Music; it was appropriated solely in Denmark. It was composed by Oh Land and Jimmy Harry, and created by David Andrew Sitek. Moreover, a few artists added to the track, including drummer Nathaniel Morton, Todd Simon who played metal instruments, and Zeph Showers who filled in as the head sound designer and blender. The tune itself was recorded at Federal Prism Studios in Glendale, California. 

Musically, "Arsonist" includes a "sweet tune" and "incidental minor-key turns". Leonie Cooper from "NME" depicted the tune's class as "straight-up lo-fi funk" and asserted it "com[es] on like Robyn created by Phoenix". Proceeding, Michael Jose Gonzalez of "Gaffa" considered it a blend of pop, funk, and soul music. All through the melody, Oh Land over and over sings "charm hoo", which was viewed as reminiscent to a portion of her past singles. Jennifer Joh from "Neon Tommy" contrasted it with the Cardigans' 1996 single "Lovefool". 

"Arsonist" got a blended to positive reaction from music commentators. "NME"s Leonie Cooper called it "wonderful", while James Christopher Monger from AllMusic considered the melody a "superior variant" of Oh Land's "My Boxer" (2013); he additionally depicted it as "Studio 54-kissed". "Gaffa"s Michael Jose Gonzalez recorded "Renaissance Girls", "My Boxer", and "Arsonist" as three potential hits from "Wish Bone" in his collection audit. In an exceptionally positive survey, "Neon Tommy"s Jennifer Joh called it "extremely quintessential Oh Land" and "extraordinary and unmistakably propelled by increasingly great tunes". In an increasingly blended audit, Christopher Monk from musicOMH felt that the tune (and the parent collection) was not "ailing in snares" and thought of it as one of "Wish Bone"s most grounded tracks, however in general said that it (alongside "Winged creature in an Airplane" and "Wonderful finish") can't coordinate the quality or infectiousness of her past singles, posting "Sun of a Gun" and "White Nights" as two precedents. So also, Hannah Eads from "The Daily Nebraskan" considered both "Fire lover" and "Renaissance Girls" to be "similarly as restless and appealing as the first", however asserted that "the melodies contribute just the same old thing new to the class". 

A going with music video for "Fire lover" was coordinated by Rasmus Weng Karlsen and Jasper Carlberg. It was discharged on 13 September 2013 through Oh Land's legitimate YouTube account. The video includes the vocalist in a wide assortment of outfits. A portion of the scenes incorporate Oh Land before a few flame artists, singing before a mirror, and thin plunging with a gathering of companions. Amid the previously mentioned scene where Oh Land seems swimming bare, blue pencil bars are utilized. 

Faculty adjusted from "Wish Bone" liner notes.