Digital Danganronpa VR: The Class Trial 

The amusement was discharged in Japan in October 2016, and worldwide in March 2017. The diversion is a tech demo where the player expects to reveal who was behind a homicide in a "class preliminary" from the main amusement in the arrangement, "". It was generally welcomed by commentators, who making the most of its visuals. 

"Digital Danganronpa VR" is an augmented experience amusement in which the player plays through the fourth "class preliminary" from the experience diversion "", where the player intends to reveal who was behind the homicide of Sakura Ogami; in contrast to the first amusement, which utilizes 2D patterns for characters, "Digital Danganronpa VR" utilizes 3D models. The player character's schoolmates give declarations, which show up as words; if the player sees something in the declaration that appears to be suspicious, they can discredit the words by shooting them with "truth shots". To do this, the player needs to turn their head toward the character who affirmed, and press a catch on the DualShock 4 controller. The diversion takes around ten minutes to play through, and closes with a first-individual succession where the character Monokuma murders the player. 

"Digital Danganronpa VR" was declared and appeared at the Animation-Comic-Game Hong Kong reasonable in July 2015 by Sony Interactive Entertainment, as a tech demo for their augmented experience headset PlayStation VR. The amusement was created by Spike Chunsoft, and was their first PlayStation 4 venture. As indicated by maker Yoshinori Terasawa, he was roused to make the amusement by Bandai Namco Entertainment's PlayStation VR title "Summer Lesson". The purpose behind making a diversion dependent on "Trigger Happy Havoc" instead of the turn off shooting amusement "" was that different organizations could make computer generated reality shooting recreations, and that the designers needed to make something that no one but they could make. Terasawa chose to make the discipline succession happen from a first-individual point of view to make the player feel frightfulness, yet in addition included Monokuma to help the state of mind. To have the capacity to finish the diversion rapidly, the designers utilized the amusement motor Unreal Engine 4. 

The diversion was discharged carefully for the PlayStation 4 on October 13, 2016 in Japan and Hong Kong; it was made accessible uninhibitedly for PlayStation Plus endorsers, with no discharge reported for players without a membership. The Hong Kong discharge was made accessible in English, with English voice overs; Spike Chunsoft declared in October 2016 that they were progressing in the direction of discharging that form in the West. It was discharged in North America on March 7, 2017, and in Europe on March 10. 

"No-nonsense Gamer" Edward Dang was certain to the amusement, and trusted that it would prompt augmented experience arrivals of complete "Danganronpa" recreations. Jordan Devore at Destructoid believed that the diversion did not look energizing dependent on off-screen film, yet noticed this frequently is the situation for augmented reality recreations, and suspected that it "could be the beginning of something perfect". Chris Carter, likewise composing for Destructoid, appreciated the diversion and called it worth playing, yet not something to get energized over because of its short length. Aki Otsuki at 4Gamer.net suggested the amusement, and said that encountering the discipline arrangement in computer generated reality was appalling. "Famitsu" preferred the inundation given by the computer generated experience and the 360-degree developments. Hiroaki Mabuchi at IGN Japan said that the new condition illustrations were an incredible propagation of their "Trigger Happy Havoc" partners, and that the puzzling environment fit "Danganronpa" well.