Gilbert de Clare, eighth Earl of Gloucester 

Gilbert de Clare, eighth Earl of Gloucester, seventh Earl of Hertford, tenth Lord of Clare, fifth Lord of Glamorgan (c. 10 May 1291 – 24 June 1314) was an English aristocrat and a military administrator in the Scottish Wars. As opposed to most English lords at the time, his primary center lay in the quest for war instead of in household political conflict. He was the child of Gilbert de Clare, seventh Earl of Gloucester, and Joan of Acre, girl of Edward I. The more seasoned Gilbert kicked the bucket when his child was just four years of age, and the more youthful Gilbert was contributed with his earldoms at the youthful age of sixteen. Very quickly, he wound up associated with the resistance of the northern outskirt, however later he was drawn into the battles among Edward II and a portion of his aristocrats. He was one of the Lords Ordainers who requested the ejection of the ruler's most loved Piers Gaveston in 1311. At the point when Gaveston was slaughtered on his arrival in 1312, Gloucester arranged a settlement between the culprits and the lord. 

Presently one of Edward's most grounded supporters, he went with the ruler on a crusade to Scotland in 1314, when a few different nobles can't. He was murdered at the Battle of Bannockburn on 24 June, under to some degree hazy conditions. Gloucester was the most conspicuous of the losses of the fight, which finished in an embarrassing thrashing for England. As he had no issue, his demise denoted the finish of the noticeable de Clare family. His bequests were separated between his three sisters, one of whom was hitched to the lord's new top choice, Hugh Despenser the Younger. Despenser's savage development of the de Clare lordship of Glamorgan in Wales drove legitimately to the inconveniences of Edward II's later rule, incorporating a disobedience in the Welsh Marches, the annihilation of the Earl of Lancaster at the Battle of Boroughbridge, and in the long run the statement of the ruler by Roger Mortimer and Queen Isabella in 1326. 

Gilbert de Clare was the child of Gilbert de Clare, seventh Earl of Gloucester – known as Gilbert 'the Red' – who in 1290 wedded Joan of Acre, girl of Edward I. As a condition for the marriage, the lord needed to surrender every one of his territories to the ruler, just to have them returned together to himself and his better half for the lifetime of either. This give was made relying on the prerequisite that the grounds would go to the couple's joint beneficiaries, however on the off chance that they were childless to Joan's beneficiaries from any later relational unions. The more youthful Gilbert was brought into the world the following year, around 10 May 1291, verifying the legacy for the de Clare family, yet his dad kicked the bucket just four years after the fact, on 7 December 1295, while the kid was as yet a minor. As a result of the joint enfeoffment, Joan kept the guardianship of the family lands, and did reverence to the ruler on 20 January the following year. 

In 1297, Joan furtively wedded Ralph de Monthermer, a knight in the late lord's family. This incensed Edward I, who had other marriage plans for Joan. The ruler detained Monthermer, yet later yielded, and endorsed the marriage. As a result of the past settlement, Joan was as yet titled noblewoman, and her new spouse progressed toward becoming Earl of Gloucester and Hertford. This, be that as it may, went on for the life of Joan, who passed on in 1307. Just a couple of months after the fact, Gilbert was allowed his legacy, and by March 1308 made Earl of Gloucester and Hertford, at the youthful age of sixteen. This allow was made by Edward II, who succeeded his dad Edward I in July 1307. It was recently trusted that Edward II and Gilbert were raised together, however this depends on a perplexity with someone else of a similar name. This other Gilbert de Clare, who was nearer to the ruler in age, was in reality the duke's cousin, the child of Thomas de Clare, Lord of Thomond. 

Gilbert's first years as lord were transcendently worried about the Scottish Wars. He had no close to home enthusiasm for the district, however the Welsh Marches, where his landed intrigue lay, were generally assuaged at the time, and Scotland displayed a decent chance to seek after military wonder and reward. He was very quickly trusted with vital military directions on the northern fringe, and filled in as superintendent of Scotland from 1308 to 1309, and as skipper of Scotland and the northern walks in 1309. He drove a campaign to assuage the palace of Rutherglen in December 1308. The war exertion, in any case, was not sought after with a similar force by Edward II as it had been by his dad. The new lord's disregard of the Scottish Wars permitted Robert the Bruce to recapture the activity in the war. 

This circumstance prompted disappointment among the English honorability. Notwithstanding the Scottish issue, there was likewise discontent with the lord's treatment of his top choice, Piers Gaveston. Gaveston's advancement from relative lack of clarity to Earl of Cornwall, joined with his self-important conduct, caused hatred among the set up respectability. Gloucester was at first not threatening to Gaveston, who had hitched Gloucester's sister Margaret in October 1307. He did, be that as it may, share in the other lords' dissatisfaction with Edward's absence of activity towards Scotland. In 1308, hence, Gloucester was among the barons who requested Gaveston's outcast, an interest the ruler was compelled to meet. After this, he appears to have been accommodated with the ruler, and in 1309 he went about as a go between when the barons consented to Gaveston's arrival. Relations between the ruler and the honorability crumbled considerably further, in any case, after Gaveston's arrival. In 1310, a gathering of alleged Lords Ordainers were delegated to draft the Ordinances of 1311, a lot of confinements on the standard of Edward II, including a restored outcast for Gaveston. Gloucester, who was as yet a supporter of the lord, was not at first among the Ordainers, yet was selected on 4 March 1311, upon the demise of the Earl of Lincoln. 

Disregarding his support in the baronial change development, Gloucester still kept up the trust of the ruler. He, Gaveston and the Earl of Warenne were the main dukes to go with the ruler on a Scottish crusade in 1310–11. In March 1311, while the Ordinances were still in the activities, Gloucester was delegated watchman of the domain while the lord was still in Scotland. There are signs that he may have dropped out with Thomas, Earl of Lancaster – who was now the pioneer of the resistance against the ruler – over a quarrel between two of their individual retainers. At the point when Gaveston afresh came back from outcast, in any case, Gloucester agreed with the baronial restriction. The dukes separated the nation into various parts for protection, and Gloucester was given charge of the south. In June 1312, Gaveston was caught by Guy de Beauchamp, Earl of Warwick, who was working in participation with Lancaster. Aymer de Valence, Earl of Pembroke, who had the care of Gaveston and had ensured his security to the lord, spoke to Gloucester, as Gaveston's brother, for help. Gloucester, nonetheless, would not help, and Gaveston was executed. This demonstration conveyed the nation to the verge of common war, and Gloucester was one of only a handful couple of men who was still confided in enough by the two sides to have the capacity to take on a job as arbiter. In the next months, he was among the fundamental mediators progressing in the direction of an understanding between the lord and the culpable dukes, an exertion that was in any event incidentally effective. 

Gloucester stayed in the internal hover around the ruler throughout the following months. In the late spring of 1313, he was again gatekeeper of the domain while the lord was in France, and in February 1314, he was sent to France on a conciliatory mission with respect to Gascony. The best issue of the rule, be that as it may, remained the uncertain clash with Scotland, and the resurgence of Robert the Bruce. In the late spring of 1314, Edward at long last set out on a noteworthy Scottish battle. The goal was to ensure the English army at Stirling Castle from an assault by Bruce. The battle was hindered by the nonappearance of a portion of the more noteworthy magnates, for example, Lancaster and Warwick. There were as yet various extraordinary rulers in the lord's organization, including Humphrey de Bohun, Earl of Hereford, Pembroke and Gloucester. These men were significant to the lord for their capacity to raise expansive quantities of troops from their territories in the Welsh Marches. On 23 June 1314, the regal armed force had passed Falkirk and was inside a couple of miles of Stirling. There were, notwithstanding, indications of hardship between the barons of Gloucester and Hereford. Gloucester had been given the order of the English vanguard, a position he had earned through his faithfulness to the ruler. However Hereford, who had been set under Gloucester's order, trusted the direction had a place with him, in his ability of innate Constable of England. 

Gloucester was associated with a concise conflict with the Scots on 23 June, the day preceding the principle fight. While the lord thought about whether to camp throughout the evening or to draw in the Scots promptly, Gloucester and Hereford – either through disobedience or a misconception – charged straightforwardly into the spot called the New Park, where the Scots were stayed. The English promptly kept running into troubles, and Hereford's cousin Henry de Bohun was murdered by King Robert the Bruce. It was maybe amid the consequent retreat that Gloucester was lost his steed, however figured out how to escape safe. The following day the English were as yet not by any stretch of the imagination chose the game-plan. While Gloucester took the piece of certain accomplished commanders, prescribing that Edward maintain a strategic distance from fight that day, the more youthful men encompassing the ruler marked this lazy and weak, and prompted assault. As indicated by the "Vita Edwardi", when Edward became furious and blamed Gloucester for conspiracy, the duke mightily answered that he would demonstrate his devotion on the field of fight. 

The most point by point record of the Earl of Gloucester's demise at the Battle of Bannockburn is the account "Vita Edwardi Secundi". This record is composed as an ethical story, explaining the lord's valor and the apprehensive direct of his friends. Hence, its recorded precision must be taken with some alert. As indicated by certain records, Gloucester surged recklessly into fight in the quest for magnificence, and succumbed to his very own absurdity. The "Vita", then again, guaranteed that, as the baron was energetically attempting to fight off the Scottish assaults, he was knocked off his steed, and executed when his very own men neglected to act the hero. All things considered, the squabbles among Gloucester and Hereford over priority could have added to the tumultuous circumstance. As indicated by one record, Gloucester raced into fight without a distinctive emblem, presenting himself to the Scottish troopers, who generally would have been anxious to verify an important payoff. 

After Gloucester was executed, the English armed force before long fell into chaos, and the fight brought about a resonating triumph for the Scots, and an embarrassing withdrawal for the English. It was broadly concurred that Gloucester, with his pleased family ancestry and significant homes, was the most noticeable of the numerous setbacks that day. Robert the Bruce grieved his demise and stood vigil over Gloucester's body at a neighborhood church. Later he enabled its exchange to England, where the duke was covered at Tewkesbury Abbey, on his dad's correct hand side. 

Gloucester's political significance did not finish with his demise; his vanishing from the political scene had quick results. In his Welsh lordship of Glamorgan, the questionable circumstance brought about by his passing caused a fleeting disobedience in 1316. In Ireland, where he additionally held extensive belongings, the power vacuum he abandoned encouraged the 1315 attack by Robert the Bruce's sibling Edward. The best outcomes, in any case, came about because of the division of the de Clare domains. In 1308, Gilbert de Clare had hitched Maud (or Matilda) de Burgh, the girl of Richard de Burgh, Earl of Ulster. The couple left no enduring issue, so his passing denoted the finish of the incredible de Clare family. The family lands were worth as much as ³6,000, second just to those of the Earl of Lancaster among the honorability of the domain. 

The grounds went into imperial belonging while the matter of legacy was being settled. By the involve of 1290, the grounds must be acquired by direct relatives of the seventh baron and Joan of Acre. Maud figured out how to defer the procedures by professing to be pregnant, however by 1316 obviously this couldn't be the situation. The late lord's sisters, Eleanor, Margaret (presently bereaved after the demise of Gaveston) and Elizabeth were by 1317 all hitched to top choices of Edward II: Hugh Despenser the Younger, Hugh de Audley and Roger d'Amory separately. The three were allowed a balance of the English belongings, however Despenser got the whole lordship of Glamorgan in Wales, politically the most imperative of the de Clare lands. 

Not content with his part, Despenser utilized his association with the ruler to encroach on the terrains of other Marcher rulers. This caused hatred among such men as Hereford and Roger Mortimer, who ascended in insubordination in 1321. The disobedience was pounded, yet obstruction proceeded under the Marcher rulers' partner Thomas of Lancaster, who was vanquished at the Battle of Boroughbridge in 1322, and executed. Despite the fact that this triumph incidentally verified Edward's situation on the position of royalty, he was in the long run ousted in 1326 by Roger Mortimer, with the assistance of the lord's significant other, Isabella of France. The title of Earl of Gloucester was reproduced by Edward II's child Edward III in 1337, for Hugh de Audley. 

Probe Post Mortem 

b. Gloucester's significant other Maud was the sister of Bruce's better half Elizabeth, the two girls of Richard de Burgh, Earl of Ulster. 

Essential: 

Optional: