I Won't Be the One to Let Go 

"I Won't Be the One to Let Go" is a tune recorded by American artist Barbra Streisand and Barry Manilow for the previous' 6th aggregation collection, "Two part harmonies" (2002). It was discharged as the collection's solitary single on November 4, 2002, by Columbia Records. The track was composed and delivered by Richard Marx with extra songwriting originating from Manilow and extra generation taken care of by Walter Afanasieff. At first an airplay and gushing just single in the United States, a limited time CD single of "I Won't Be the One to Let Go" was discharged and incorporates the radio alter and collection variant of the tune. 

A grown-up contemporary pop melody, the single contains verses talking about shared love in a relationship and expelling fears of deserting. The melody isolated music faultfinders, with some calling it sweet and "feel-better", however others portraying it as fair and dull. In 2014, Streisand highlighted "I Won't Be the One to Let Go" as a little something extra track on the grand release of her 34th studio collection, "Accomplices". 

"I Won't Be the One to Let Go" is taken from Barbra Streisand's gathering collection "Two part harmonies" (2002), an accumulation of 19 two part harmonies spreading over from her vocation. Her two part harmony with Barry Manilow is one of the record's two new tracks, the other being "All I Know of Love" with Josh Groban. "I Won't Be the One to Let Go" was composed and created by Richard Marx with extra songwriting originating from Manilow and extra generation taken care of by Walter Afanasieff. It fills in as Streisand's first single discharge since 1999's "In the event that You Ever Leave Me", which was a two part harmony with Vince Gill and is likewise highlighted as one of the nineteen tunes on the parent collection. 

The single was most readily accessible for advanced gushing on AOL Music on November 4, 2002, as a select benefit to site individuals. In spite of the fact that the track was not discharged industrially, "I Won't Be the One to Let Go" was disseminated as a special CD single on January 6, 2003. With the discharge dealt with by Columbia Records, the CD was sent only to United States radio stations and incorporates the "Radio Version Edit" and "Radio Version" arrivals of the melody. In 2014, Streisand included her two part harmony as a little something extra track on the grand release of her 34th studio collection, "Accomplices". 

With a term of four minutes and 41 seconds, "I Won't Be the One to Let Go" is a grown-up contemporary pop number, which, as indicated by William Ruhlmann from "AllMusic", is like the whole of the tunes included on "Two part harmonies". In a meeting for "Barry Gram" magazine, Manilow communicated delight in having one of his melodies sung by Streisand and called her voice "astonishing". He explained: 

I've quite recently recorded it with the splendid Barbra Streisand ... we seem like we like one another and mean what we're singing since we chipped away at it together, in a similar room, for quite a long time and days before we went into the studio. I imagine that there's an undeniable association among us (we really originate from a similar neighborhood in Brooklyn) and I figure you will almost certainly feel that when you hear the melody. It's a great two part harmony and I'm extremely glad for the melody. 

Melodiously, Streisand and Manilow talk about shared love in a relationship and, on occasion, they reject fears that they have, for example, surrender. Amid the second section, they interchange: "Who realizes what anticipates us 'round the twist/Count on me, loyally/Though all that we have would never end/It would never end." In the tune, they sing: "This I swear, this I swear/I won't be the one to give up, to let go..." 

A staff part at "Board" recognized both "I Won't Be the One to Let Go" and collection track "All I Know of Love" as the "two fine new endeavors" on "Two part harmonies", considering the previous single a "sweet" cooperation. BBC Music's Morag Reavley delighted in the single, considering it a "taking off, feel-better" track. Be that as it may, William Ruhlmann from AllMusic was progressively reproachful of the tune, depicting it as simply "average". Tom Santopietro, creator of "The Importance of Being Barbra: The Brilliant, Tumultuous Career of Barbra Streisand", called "I Won't Be the One to Let Go" an "irrelevant [...] new melody" and eventually observed it to be dreary.