Have You Seen This Snail? 

"Have You Seen This Snail?", otherwise called "Where's Gary?", is the third scene of the fourth season and the 63rd generally speaking scene of the American enlivened TV arrangement "SpongeBob SquarePants". Its movement was coordinated by administering executive, Alan Smart and Tom Yasumi, composed by Aaron Springer and Paul Tibbitt. Springer additionally worked as storyboard chief. The scene initially disclosed on Nickelodeon in the United States on November 11, 2005. On-screen character and comic Amy Poehler visitor featured in the scene as the voice of Grandma. Artist Stew played out the melody "Gary, Come Home". 

The arrangement pursues the experiences and tries of the title character and his different companions in the submerged city of Bikini Bottom. In this scene, Gary, SpongeBob's pet ocean snail, pursues far from home inclination disregarded by an occupied SpongeBob and is embraced by another proprietor. Subsequent to understanding the mistake of his ways, SpongeBob sets out with his closest companion Patrick to look for his venerated pet and take him back to his legitimate home. 

The scene gathered eight million watchers, accomplishing the most elevated number of satellite audience members matured six to eleven years of age for 2005. "Have You Seen This Snail?" got commonly positive audits from TV commentators upon discharge. 

SpongeBob gets an oar ball sent to him via the post office and chooses to play it. He is completely devoured by the test and overlooks Gary for ten days. Gary feels ignored and flees from home. SpongeBob is shaken from his fascination with the entry of Patrick, and can't discover Gary. SpongeBob finds a note saying that Gary has left looking for another proprietor. In the interim, Gary has meandered into another city, experiencing a pack of snails. Gary flees from the snails, yet they simply need to give him a few nachos. A thoughtful old woman finds Gary and errors him for one of her pets, Miss Tuftsy. Gary is showered with adoration and nourishment while SpongeBob gets down to business, pitiful that Gary is as yet absent. Mr. Krabs urges SpongeBob to work, however SpongeBob confuses him, and he takes a vacation day to search for Gary. He and Patrick set up publications and signs wherever in the desire for discovering Gary. Here is the point at which the hit bop "Gary's Song" (performed by Stew) plays, as Spongebob hangs up flyers. 

At the old woman's home, Gary has been sustained a great deal. The old woman puts out crisp sheets of flyers given to her by Patrick. After understanding them, Gary understands that SpongeBob really adores him and needs him back. He attempts to leave, yet as opposed to doing that, he winds up setting off to the storage room, loaded up with void snail shells. At the point when the old woman attempts to sustain him once more, Gary finds that the old woman doubtlessly has vile motives—she is potentially endeavoring to stuff and after that eat him. He makes his departure, yet the old woman pursues him out onto the roads. Gary rapidly discovers one of the hoodlum snails he saw previously, which the old woman currently confuses with Miss Tuftsy, and takes him home. Back home, SpongeBob abandons his look for Gary, and attempts to disregard him by going for a stroll, yet his recollections continue ringing a bell and disquieting him. He is continually reminded as the roads are loaded up with blurbs and signs for Gary. SpongeBob then hears a howl. At first he supposes he is envisioning Gary is there, however then he pivots to discover Gary is really next to him, and he is excited to see his darling pet once more. 

"Have You Seen This Snail?" is a 22 min exceptional scene composed by Paul Tibbitt, with Aaron Springer filling in as author and storyboard executive, and managing chief, Alan Smart and Tom Yasumi filling in as movement chiefs. The scene initially publicized on Nickelodeon in the United States on November 11, 2005. Preceding its debut, Nickelodeon discharged a review clasp and reward inclusion of the scene on Nickelodeon's broadband online stage TurboNick, accessible on Nick.com. Nickelodeon likewise propelled the "Trail of the Snail" streak diversion. 

In a public statement on November 1, 2005, Nickelodeon formally reported the scene and advanced it as the "Where's Gary" uncommon. As indicated by the system, "It's a pitiful day in Bikini Bottom when SpongeBob discovers that his dearest pet snail Gary is missing and that he might be to blame in the mollusk's vanishing." Marjorie Cohn, Executive Vice President of Development and Original Programming for Nickelodeon, said "Children love their pets and there's positively some relatability here in the connection among SpongeBob and Gary - skewed however it might be[...] It's enjoyable to see Gary express an entire scope of feelings utilizing just his mark 'whimper.'" 

Notwithstanding the ordinary cast, American entertainer and "Saturday Night Live" performing artist Amy Poehler visitor featured in the scene as the voice of Grandma, a sweet elderly person who received Gary in the wake of fleeing. "Have You Seen This Snail?" included a unique bit of music composed for the scene by the American artist Stew, entitled "Gary, Come Home". 

Nickelodeon upheld the scene with a month-long off-air showcasing effort including print, open air and shopper item accomplice support. Nickelodeon likewise propelled an on-air sweepstakes called "Where's Gary". Consistently for five days prompting the scene's debut, Patchy the Pirate (a character depicted as the leader of the "SpongeBob SquarePants" Fan Club played by Tom Kenny), and other big name visitors hunt in different areas down Gary. By visiting Nick.com, the watchers could get a "Trail of The Snail" following card to enter Patchy's hunt areas so as to win the sweepstakes. The prize was an outing to the Nickelodeon Animation Studios to meet the creation group of the show and to sit in on a voice recording session with the arrangement cast. 

On November 15, 2005, "Have You Seen This Snail?" was discharged on the DVD aggregation called "Where's Gary". Moreover, the gathering highlights six different scenes: "The Lost Mattress", "Krabs versus Tiny fish", "Great Neighbors", "Ability Crane", and "The Great Snail Race". It was likewise incorporated into the "SpongeBob SquarePants: Season 4, Vol. 1" DVD on September 12, 2006. On September 22, 2009, "Have You Seen This Snail?" was discharged in the "SpongeBob SquarePants: The First 100 Episodes" DVD, close by every one of the scenes of seasons one through five. 

"Have You Seen This Snail?" was viewed by eight million watchers. It was the most elevated appraised program on all TV with kids matured two-eleven for the time of 2005 behind the "Super Bowl" and the "Super Bowl kick-off", and the most elevated evaluated program on all of link with youngsters matured two to eleven and kids matured six to eleven of every 2005. 

"Have You Seen This Snail?" got for the most part positive surveys from TV commentators. Tom Shales of "The Washington Post" called the scene profoundly silly and depicted the plot as a "clashing mob". He attracted consideration regarding how the story is like the plot of "Dumped", a prior scene in which Gary abandoned SpongeBob. David Johnson of the DVD Verdict emphatically responded to the DVD arrival of the scene and said "I don't know what to state, here. Mr. Squarepants is so incredibly well known, this circle will without a doubt offer itself." Aida Ekberg of Yahoo! Voices positioned Amy Poehler on her "Main 10 "SpongeBob SquarePants" Guest Stars" list and said "I'm shocked more entertainers haven't been visitor stars on SpongeBob. Amy Poehler works superbly with her frightening grandmother voice, playing unadulterated malice veiled behind plate after plate of chocolate chip treats." Paul Mavis of DVD Talk adored the scene "[...]When Gary acknowledges he needs to escape from her devastating affection (which approaches consistent gorging) or kick the bucket like the other snail shells he finds[...]" He said "it's both clever and rather contacting." 

Nader Michael of the "St. Petersburg Times" was not all that constructive about the scene be that as it may, scrutinizing how SpongeBob's baffled and miserable character for "Have You Seen This Snail?" is very not the same as the character's typical splendid identity. Blogger and Blogcritics organizer Eric Olsen said "the scene itself is somewhat wan and slack, outstandingly ailing in the quality of jazzed craziness that a large number of men, ladies and, um, youngsters so joyfully sever to." 

A few sections in the scene were appeared in the 2007 film "Alvin and the Chipmunks" when the chipmunks stare at the TV. 

The included tune "Gary Come Home" has turned into a well known web image and has been secured, remixed, and examined by numerous individuals on YouTube and different stages.