High Street (IND Eighth Avenue Line) 

High Street, likewise named as High Street–Brooklyn Bridge, and furthermore alluded to as "Brooklyn Bridge Plaza" and "Cranberry Street", is a station on the IND Eighth Avenue Line of the New York City Subway. It is situated at Cadman Plaza East close Red Cross Place and the Brooklyn Bridge approach in Brooklyn Heights, Brooklyn. Its name originates from more seasoned road names; its unique area was at the crossing point of High Street and Washington Street. It is served by the A train consistently and the C train consistently aside from late evenings. 

The High Street station was a piece of a three-stop augmentation of the IND Eighth Avenue Line from Chambers Street in Lower Manhattan to Jay Street–Borough Hall in Downtown Brooklyn. Development of the augmentation started in June 1928. Because of the station's nearness to the Cranberry Street Tunnel under the East River, rather than ordinary cut-and-spread (or open-cut) development strategies, the station site was built underneath the road (the passage is beneath the surface at its absolute bottom) utilizing mining methods. The station was worked between the eastern finishes of the cast-iron waterway tubes strengthened with bond, prompting its cylindrical structure. The profundity of the station implied that couple of structures in the region would be bothered or wrecked, with the exception of two structures along Cranberry Street between Henry Street and Old Fulton Street. 

The expansion opened to Jay Street on February 1, 1933, however the High Street station stayed shut down for an extra five months. The trains went through the station ceaselessly, in light of the fact that the elevators to the road had not been finished because of absence of financing. That month, the agreement for four lifts in the station was granted to Otis Elevator Company. The station opened on June 24, 1933. 

The station was situated beneath the destinations of the Sands Street terminal for BMT raised trains, some of which went over the Brooklyn Bridge. The BMT station shut in 1944 and was supplanted by Cadman Plaza. Old Fulton Street (presently Cadman Plaza West) and Cranberry Street was additionally the site of the printing shop where Walt Whitman's "Leaves of Grass" was first distributed in 1855. The territory is presently the site of the Whitman Close Apartments. 

The High Street station was the site of an endeavored theft of tram income on June 18, 1954, in which the unarmed culprit was lethally shot by one of the two outfitted travel representatives gathering admissions and as of now utilized exchange slips from token corners. 

During the 1970s, the elevators at the eastern end of the station to Adams Street were supplanted. 

This underground station has two tracks and one island stage. It is the northernmost Brooklyn station for the An and C trains. Toward the north, the IND Eighth Avenue Line enters the Cranberry Street Tunnel and goes under the East River into Manhattan. Subsequently, the station was worked in a cylinder plan, and worked with elevators between the upper toll control level and the lower mezzanine level to simpler cross the 70 foot (21 m) dip under road level. The tile groups at this station are in a dull purple shading plan. Little "High" are set underneath them at standard interims. 

East (railroad south) of the station, the line bends south onto Jay Street and has three track switches with the IND Sixth Avenue Line. A power station for the line is situated on the west side of Jay Street only north of Concord Street. A second substation is situated at Red Cross Place and Cadman Plaza East. 

There are exits at the two finishes to the full length mezzanine alongside proof of evacuated focus exits; since this station was fabricated, the territory presently known as Cadman Plaza was totally reconstructed. Cadman Plaza East, the short one-square road outside the Red Cross Place exit, was recently called Washington Street; the Washington Street moniker still applies to the street north of Prospect Street. High Street isn't straightforwardly open from the station, as the short one-square road is hindered by a parking area. Be that as it may, Red Cross Place, which was at one time a piece of High Street, is straightforwardly open. 

The geographic western leave prompts Cadman Plaza West/Old Fulton Street (in the past Fulton Street, as showed on divider mosaic signs) in Brooklyn Heights, a couple of hundred feet south of Cadman Plaza West's crossing point with Middagh Street. This was the first exit to the station. The eastern ways out lead to Adams Street, on the fringe of Brooklyn Heights, DUMBO and Downtown Brooklyn, adjoining the focal town hall for the Federal Eastern District of New York. These ways out were opened after an extra deferral to finish the lifts. Adams Street was extended from 100 feet to 160 feet during the 1950s to suit new inclines to the Brooklyn Bridge, and now conveys the auxiliary name "Brooklyn Bridge Boulevard". The present leave staircases lead to ether side of Adams Street, going about as a person on foot underpass. There are painted-over mosaics indicating previous ways out at Washington Street (presently Cadman Plaza East). 

In 2017, the station had 2,983,672 boardings, making it the 171st most utilized station in the 425-station framework. This added up to a normal of 9,215 travelers for every weekday. In 2014, the station had a normal of 8,870 every day weekday boardings, up from 5,410 day by day boardings in 2005; this spoke to a 64% ridership increment more than nine years. The station is the 26th busiest of all stations served by the An and C trains.