Silly Betrayal 

Silly Betrayal: The Dark Journey of Werner Erhard from est to Exile is a true to life book composed by independent writer Steven Pressman and first distributed in 1993 by St. Martin's Press. The book gives a record of Werner Erhard's initial life as Jack Rosenberg, his investigation of different types of self improvement systems, and his establishment of Erhard Seminars Training "est" and later of Werner Erhard and Associates and of the est successor course, "The Forum". Pressman subtleties the quick money related achievement Erhard had with these organizations, just as discussions identifying with prosecution including previous members in his courses. The work closes by going over the effect of a March 3, 1991 "an hour" communicate on CBS where individuals from Erhard's family made claims against him, and Erhard's choice to leave the United States. 

Agents of Werner Erhard and of Landmark Worldwide, the successor organization to The Forum, viewed the book as being "slanderous". There are no references or references given in the book. 

Pressman functioned as a columnist subsequent to moving on from school in 1977. He filled in as a writer for "Orange City News", the "Los Angeles Daily Journal", "California Lawyer" magazine, and Congressional Quarterly's "Week by week Report". Amid his time performing research for and expressing "Silly Betrayal", Pressman distributed articles for the "Lawful Times" paper and composed articles and filled in as a senior editorial manager for "California Republic". In 1993, Pressman filled in as a San Francisco-based legitimate writer for "California Lawyer". 

In the "Affirmations" segment of "Over the top Betrayal", Pressman composed that he depended upon both named and anonymous hotspots for data in the book, notwithstanding "recently distributed records, court transcripts, statements, and different reports in which different people have related before discussions". In an article on reasonable use for "Columbia Journalism Review", Pressman noticed that he "accumulated reams of composed materials - some of it private and secret - that were useful in illustration an exhaustive picture of my subject". In the "Day by day Journal", Pressman composed that legitimate advice for the book's distributer demanded various changes to the book "so as to lessen, if not take out, the likelihood of an effective suit for copyright encroachment". 

By 1993, Pressman and St. Martin's Press had gotten around two dozen letters from Erhard's lawyer Walter Maksym, however Erhard's delegates still couldn't seem to see the book itself. Maksym told the "San Francisco Daily Journal" in March 1993 that he needed to "certainty check the book", since he trusted that "this is a first-time obscure writer who clearly has met just individuals who have negative things to state", and expressed "We have advised the distributer that they are in charge of the precision of the book." Charlie Spicer, a senior manager at St. Martin's Press, depicted the activities of Erhard's delegates as to the book as "a frantic crusade by somebody with something to stow away". The writer himself made explicit reference to his lawful help, referencing "the potential lawful rapids that go up against writers composing nowadays about disputable subjects". 

In "Absurd Betrayal", Steven Pressman gives an ordered record of Erhard's life and organizations, from secondary school a very long time through his development of organizations that conveyed mindfulness preparing and the later contentions encompassing his business and family life. The book really expounds seeing his initial life as Jack Rosenberg and his name-change to Werner Erhard, his turn to California, and the underlying motivations behind the preparation that would progress toward becoming "est". Pressman composes that Erhard took motivation from the self improvement course Mind Dynamics, artificial intelligence, from the books "Think and Grow Rich" by Napoleon Hill, and "Psycho-Cybernetics" by Maxwell Maltz, and from Scientology and the compositions of L. Ron Hubbard. He likewise takes note of how a lawyer gifted in expense law helped Erhard in framing his first mindfulness preparing organization, Erhard Seminars Training. 

Pressman takes note of how Erhard and his organizations wound up fruitful inside two years of establishment, and composes that his mindfulness preparing programs prepared over a large portion of a million people in his courses and got a huge number of dollars in income. The book at that point portrays debates identifying with both Erhard's organizations and his detailed treatment of his family. Pressman likewise depicts the successor organization to Est, Werner Erhard and Associates, and Erhard's choice to sell the "innovation" of his course The Forum to his representatives and to leave the United States. The book's epilog incorporates a firsthand record of a Landmark Forum class driven by the previous Est-coach Laurel Scheaf in 1992. 

St. Martin's Press originally distributed "Ridiculous Betrayal" in 1993, and Random House distributed a second release of the content in 1995. 

An examination in "Kirkus Reviews", taking note of the decision of title by the writer, declared that Pressman: "makes no falsification to objectivity here." "Kirkus Reviews" condemned the book, saying "What the writer significantly neglects to give by weighing down on the negative (to the degree that almost the entirety of his sources censure est and its originator) is any genuine comprehension of est's lessons - and of why they advanced so profoundly to such huge numbers of." Paul S. Boyer, teacher of history at the University of Wisconsin–Madison, investigated the book in "The Washington Post". Boyer composed that the book "pleasantly describes the strange story" of Werner Erhard, saying "Pressman recounts to his entrancing story well." However he likewise remarked that the book gives "just the sketchiest authentic setting" of est and its foundations in societal encounters. 

An audit by Mary Carroll distributed in the American Library Association's "Booklist" noticed that the contention encompassing Erhard was not new, yet she composed that "Pressman pulls the subtleties together successfully." Carroll proceeded to remark: ""Outrageous Betrayal" is an irritating yet entrancing item exercise in the intensity of magnetism separated from soul." Frances Halpern of the "Los Angeles Times" considered the book a "condemning memoir". 

In 1995, "Over the top Betrayal" was refered to in a report on the United States Department of Transportation by the United States House of Representatives Committee on Appropriations for a situation disconnected to Erhard or Est. This was in reference to a Congressional examination of Gregory May and dubious trainings given by his organization Gregory May Associates (GMA) to the Federal Aviation Administration. The declaration given expressed that, as per "Unbelievable Betrayal", an individual from GMA's board had been impacted by Erhard Seminars Training and the Church of Scientology. 

Dan Wakefield, in his audit of the book in "," scrutinized Pressman's fundamentally basic depiction of Erhard's character. Wakefield proposed that one reason the press or "media" paints a pessimistic view is on the grounds that "no one in the media tries to address the general population who esteem in his projects." Wakefield alludes to an investigation done by assessment investigator Daniel Yankelovich in which "seven out of ten members in The Forum observed it to be 'one of their life's most remunerating encounters,' while 94 percent felt the program had 'functional' and 'suffering' esteem." While Pressman depicts the est preparing as "a hodgepodge of self improvement hypotheses, presence of mind brain science, and dime-store thoughts of inspiration," Wakefield, who had encountered the est preparing actually states, "In the event that I was "conned" by that "mess" when I did est in 1984, I'm thankful I was conned into losing the dependence on liquor that had tormented me for a fourth of a century."