Planetary Missions Program Office 

The Planetary Missions Program Office is a division of NASA headquartered at the Marshall Space Flight Center, framed by the office's Science Mission Directorate (SMD). Succeeding the Discovery and New Frontiers Program Office, it was set up in 2014 to deal with the Discovery and New Frontiers projects of low and medium-cost missions by outsider foundations, and the Solar System Exploration program of NASA-drove missions that emphasis on organized planetary science destinations. The Discovery and New Frontiers programs were set up in 1992 and 2001 individually, and have propelled fourteen essential missions together, alongside two missions propelled under the organization of the Planetary Missions Program Office. The Solar System Exploration Program was built up nearby the workplace, with three missions got ready for dispatch under the new program. 

The Planetary Missions Program Office was built up in late 2014 as a feature of a progression of changes executed by NASA after the entry of the Commerce, Justice, Science, and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 2015, which distributed US$1.438 billion to planetary missions, and the Obama organization's solicitation for the 2016 United States government spending plan. The program office is a trade for the Discovery and New Frontiers Program Office, built up in 2004, and involves their previous home office at the Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama. The Planetary Missions Program Office assumed responsibility for the Discovery and New Frontiers program, alongside the Europa Mission and NASA commitments to the European Space Agency (ESA's) "JUICE" mission, in a then-anonymous program outside of Discovery and New Frontiers. In 2017, the program was named the "Close planetary system Exploration Program", and developed to incorporate NASA's enduring "DART" part of the dropped "AIDA" mission, after ESA ended their commitment to the mission in late 2016. 

The Discovery program was set up in late 1990 as a program of ease, restricted degree nearby planetary group investigation missions, succeeding the destinations of the Planetary Observer program. In the late 1980s, pioneers at NASA selected towards costly, increasingly yearning missions to propel their goals. This incorporated the Space Exploration Initiative by the George H. W. Bramble organization, which spread out an arrangement to build Space Station Freedom and set up a human investigation program to the Moon and Mars. Steady cost overwhelms and absence of help from the United States Congress, be that as it may, made a pattern towards littler, less eager missions. NASA's Solar System Exploration Division (SSED) at first proposed to display another program of little class unmanned missions after the Planetary Observer program, however individuals were distrustful, because of the spending issues tormenting the Planetary Observer program at the time. It was chosen rather to put together it with respect to the Explorer program, following counsel from Explorer managerial staff member Tom Krimigis. Under this model, the program picked up help from that point NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin, and the program was formally affirmed by Congress in 1992. 

Initially a Planetary Observer program mission, "Close Shoemaker" was reassigned to the Discovery program, after the Jet Propulsion Laboratory and the Applied Physics Laboratory found that the mission was conceivable to execute on a financial plan littler than initially arranged. Its last mission cost would reach US$224 million. "Mars Pathfinder" was additionally reassigned to the program as a component of slices to the Space Exploration Initiative Mars Environmental Survey (MESUR) program, following the loss of its leader "Mars Observer". Both "Close Shoemaker" and "Mars Pathfinder" were effectively propelled in February and December 1996 separately; the previous accomplished circle around the space rock 433 Eros in February 2000, and the last arrived on Mars and conveyed the main operational Mars meanderer, "Sojourner", to the outside of the planet in July 1997. After "Close Shoemaker" and "Mars Pathfinder", the Discovery program started choosing its future missions from recommendations from outsider foundations, in rivalries named "Declarations of Opportunity" (AOs). Twelve missions have been chosen through AOs, with the most recent, observation missions "Lucy" and "Mind", chose in January 2017 following a three-year long challenge. The Discovery program additionally directs "Missions of Opportunity" (MOs) to create instruments for non-NASA missions, for example, the ASPERA-3 instrument installed ESA's "Mars Express" and the M instrument on board ISRO's "Chandrayaan-1". MOs were initially chosen in rivalries nearby AOs, however have been chosen in "Remain solitary Mission of Opportunity Notices" (SALMONs) since 2009. SALMON-3 is at present in progress to choose NASA's commitment to JAXA's "Martian Moons Exploration" mission. 

The New Frontiers program is the successor to the dropped Outer Planet/Solar Probe (OPSP) program, a venture which expected to dispatch the "Europa Orbiter" astrobiology mission, the "Pluto Kuiper Express" surveillance mission, and the "Sun oriented Orbiter" heliophysics mission. To diminish the developing expenses of the OPSP, the "Pluto Kuiper Express" was dropped in 2000 by then-Science Mission Directorate Edward J. Weiler, who in this manner acknowledged recommendations for a substitution mission and displayed the challenge after the Discovery program's AOs. The "New Horizons" mission was picked to supplant "Pluto Kuiper Express" in the OPSP program in November 2001, however the whole program, including the "Europa Orbiter", "New Horizons", and "Sun powered Probe", was dropped by Administrator of NASA Sean O'Keefe in February 2002, not long after his arrangement by President George W. Bramble. O'Keefe refered to a requirement for a rebuilding of NASA and its undertakings, falling in accordance with the Bush Administration's desire for NASA to refocus on "innovative work, and tending to the executives weaknesses." 

The "New Horizons" group effectively campaigned for the financing and improvement of their main goal, showing up at the highest point of the National Research Council's Planetary Science Decadal Survey for 2003– 2013. Weiler and after that Solar System Exploration Division Director Colleen Hartman built up the New Frontiers program in 2003 to help reserve and dispatch "New Horizons" and future recommendations from the Decadal Survey. "New Horizons" was propelled as the program's first mission on January 20, 2006, and effectively played out the primary observation of Pluto and its moons in July 2015. An all-encompassing mission is in progress to watch Kuiper Belt Objects (KBOs), including a flyby of Ultima Thule in January 2019. In the primary New Frontiers AO, "Juno", a mission to explore the inside of Jupiter, was chosen over the "MoonRise" lunar example return mission. "Juno" propelled on August 5, 2011, and touched base at Jupiter in July 2016. In May 2011, the "OSIRIS-REx" space rock test return mission was chosen over "MoonRise" and "SAGE" for the program's third mission. "OSIRIS-REx" propelled on September 8, 2016, and will touch base at the Near-Earth object (NEO) 101955 Bennu in August 2018. The AO for the program's fourth mission is as of now in progress, with "CAESAR" and "Dragonfly" chose as the challenge's finalists. 

In late 2014, the Solar System Exploration program was set up close by the Planetary Missions Program Office to "execute organized planetary science." The primary arranged mission of the program is "DART", a space rock avoidance test focusing on 65803 Didymos booked to dispatch in 2020 or 2021. Initially a part of "AIDA", "DART"s sway was planned to be seen by ESA's "Point" orbiter, which would keep on contemplating Didymos from circle. Be that as it may, the ESA Council at clerical dimension dropped the "Point" mission for subsidizing for the "ExoMars 2020" wanderer, refering to spending concerns. In spite of the crossing out of "Point", NASA focused on their unique arrangement, picking to proceed exclusively with "DART". Two Europa astrobiology missions are planned for the Solar System Exploration program. The "Europa Clipper" is planned to dispatch in the mid 2020s on the debut payload trip of the Space Launch System. The ESA "JUICE" mission to think about Europa, Ganymede, and Callisto will use the NASA-fabricated, Solar System Exploration Program-subsidized Ultraviolet Spectrograph (UVS) and parts of the Particle Environment Package (PEP) and Radar for Icy Moons Exploration (RIME) instruments.