Jenova Chen 

Xinghan Chen (; conceived October 8, 1981), referred to expertly as Jenova Chen, is a Chinese computer game architect. He is the originator of the honor winning diversions "Cloud", "Stream", "Blossom", and "Adventure", and is prime supporter of Thatgamecompany. 

Chen is from Shanghai, where he earned a four year certification in software engineering with a minor in advanced craftsmanship and structure. He at that point moved to the United States, where he earned a graduate degree from the University of Southern California's Interactive Media Division. While there he made "Cloud" and "Stream", and met individual understudy Kellee Santiago. After a concise period at Maxis taking a shot at "Spore", he established Thatgamecompany with Santiago and turned into the organization's inventive executive. The organization marked a three-diversion manage Sony Computer Entertainment, and has sold "Stream", "Blossom", and "Voyage" through the PlayStation Network. 

As Chen was conceived in a culture other than the way of life he presently lives in, he endeavors to make recreations that intrigue generally to all individuals. His objective with his diversions is to help computer games developed as a medium by making amusements that move passionate reactions in the player that different recreations are inadequate. In spite of the fact that he and Thatgamecompany can and have made progressively customary diversions, he doesn't anticipate economically building up any of them, as he doesn't believe that it fits with their objectives as a free computer game engineer. 

Chen was conceived in Shanghai on October 8, 1981, and lived there until 2003. His folks were "a white collar class family", and his dad worked in the product advancement industry, having recently taken a shot at "one of the soonest mammoth PCs in China". In spite of the fact that Chen was keen on workmanship and drawing as a youthful kid, his dad affected him towards PCs, participate in him in programming challenges from when he was 10 years of age. He ended up inspired by computer games that he saw there, however was not as eager about programming. While an adolescent, he had profound enthusiastic encounters with recreations that he played, including "The Legend of Sword and Fairy", which he attributes to the way that he was not as presented to books, movies, or life occasions that other individuals would have had those encounters with. These encounters drove him to attempt to make those sorts of sentiments in diversions as a grown-up, when increasingly passionate development had caused his "models to ascend" in what might move him in an amusement. It was amid secondary school that he picked the English name Jenova after a character in "Definite Fantasy VII", needing a name that would be one of a kind anyplace he utilized it as there were "a great many Jason Chens". 

He earned a degree in Computer Science and Engineering in Shanghai Jiao Tong University, which because of his experience in PCs he found "very simple", yet portrays himself as investing quite a bit of his energy there showing himself advanced workmanship and activity, and later completed a minor in computerized craftsmanship and plan at Donghua University. Still keen on computer games, he was engaged with making three computer games as a feature of an understudy gathering while in school. After graduating, he experienced difficulty getting a new line of work in the Chinese computer game industry that consolidated his interests of "building, workmanship, and structure", and also felt that "not very many recreations [had] really accomplished those characteristics that would intrigue a grown-up". He likewise thought to be working in advanced movement for movies. 

He at that point went to the United States to gain a graduate degree in the School of Cinematic Arts at the University of Southern California. Chen contemplated in the Interactive Media Program, another division of the School of Cinematic Arts. His expectation at the time was to utilize the degree to land the sort of position he needed back in China. At USC, he ended up enlivened when he went to the Game Developers Conference, where he decidedly thought about the amusements he had made in school with the understudy work present at the Independent Games Festival segment of the gathering. While at USC he met Kellee Santiago, another understudy in a similar program, and the two chose to cooperate on recreations that would be outside of the standard. 

Their first diversion, which won an allow of twenty thousand dollars from USC to create, was "Cloud", discharged in 2005, which "centers around a youthful clinic tolerant who takes off in his psyche regardless of being caught inside". The thought was incompletely founded on himself, as when he was a kid he was regularly hospitalized for asthma. It was structured as an endeavor to "grow the range of feelings computer games inspire". At an understudy grandstand at the Game Developers Conference, Chen and Santiago demonstrated the diversion to an agent from Sony, John Hight, saying that it was the principal amusement in the "Zen" class. Hight was intrigued, however no arrangement was approaching. The amusement won the Best Student Philosophy grant at the Slamdance Guerilla Games Competition and a Student Showcase grant at the Independent Games Festival, and was exhibited on Spike TV, G4TV, and CBS Sunday. 

Chen felt that the reason that "Cloud" had been so heartily gotten was on the grounds that the feelings it started in players were not the same as some other amusement accessible at the time, and trusted that it was his "purpose in life" to make more recreations that changed what individuals saw computer games as. Chen proceeded to do his lord's theory the next year in the idea of dynamic trouble alteration, where the amusement alters how it responds to the player dependent on the over a significant time span activities of that player. Chen showed his thoughts with "Stream", a Flash amusement made with Nicholas Clark. The diversion includes the player directing a sea-going microorganism through different profundities of the sea, devouring different living beings and advancing all the while. It was discharged in March 2006; it got 100,000 downloads in its initial two weeks and by July had been downloaded more than multiple times. A PlayStation 3 form was declared in May 2006 as a downloadable amusement by means of the PlayStation Store, and was discharged in February 2007. A variant for the PlayStation Portable, created by SuperVillain Studios, was discharged in March 2008. "Stream" turned into the most downloaded amusement on the PlayStation Network in 2007, and won Best Downloadable Game at the Game Developers Choice Awards. 

Subsequent to graduating, Chen and Santiago shaped their own amusement organization, Thatgamecompany, in Los Angeles where regardless he lives and marked an arrangement with Sony for three PlayStation Store recreations. The PS3 variant of "Stream" was the first, and keeping in mind that it was being developed Chen worked for Maxis on the amusement "Spore". Upon "Flow"s discharge, Chen came back to Thatgamecompany and started taking a shot at their second diversion. 

The following amusement, "Bloom", was Chen and Thatgamecompany's "first diversion outside the wellbeing net of the scholarly world". Chen was the imaginative chief accountable for the diversion, while Santiago was the maker and Clark was the lead fashioner. The organization went in size from six to nine individuals at different phases of the amusement's advancement. "Bloom" was expected by Chen to incite positive feelings in the player, and to go about as "an enthusiastic safe house". Chen portrayed the amusement as "an intelligent ballad investigating the pressure among urban and nature". He settled on a "nature" topic right off the bat in the advancement procedure, saying that he "had this idea that each PlayStation resembles a gateway in your family room, it drives you to elsewhere. I thought; wouldn't it be pleasant in the event that it was an entryway that would enable you to be grasped naturally." Chen planned the amusement around the possibility that the main role of stimulation items like computer games was the sentiments that they evoked in the group of onlookers, and that the passionate scope of most recreations was extremely constrained. To make "Blossom" have the "passionate range" that he needed, Chen took a gander at the improvement procedure as making a show-stopper, as opposed to a "fun" diversion, which would not incite the ideal feelings. In 2008, amid "Blossom's" advancement, Chen was named to the MIT Technology Review TR35 as one of the best 35 trend-setters on the planet younger than 35. 

After "Bloom" was discharged to basic applause and grants, Chen and Thatgamecompany proceeded onward to their next diversion, "Voyage". "Adventure" was planned by Chen to concentrate on the component of correspondence and social connection in computer games. Since in many recreations the correspondence between players is centered around explicit objectives, in "Adventure" Chen expected for the player to have the capacity to either play alone or to run over different players, yet not have the capacity to speak with them legitimately. Rather, players need to assemble associations with one another through their activities, helping one another or leaving as they pick. "Adventure" was discharged on the PlayStation Network on March 13, 2012, and has gotten basic recognition. 

Chen plays a wide assortment of computer games, yet he names his most noteworthy impacts as "Katamari Damacy", "Ico" and "Shadow of the Colossus". He additionally names "Last Fantasy VII" as an impact, and the amusement that he took his received name from. He by and by plays amusements "aggressively", including titles, for example, "Road Fighter IV" and "StarCraft". He believes he has a focused nature, which he has turned towards "winning" at being an amusement creator by making recreations that are not normal for what is in the market instead of towards making aggressive diversions. As he was brought up in China and works in America, Chen feels that he can't completely identify with either culture as a diversion planner. In that capacity, rather than endeavoring to make amusements that fit consummately with one culture he attempts to make recreations that tap into emotions that are all inclusive and autonomous of culture. 

At the point when Chen quit Maxis to re-join Thatgamecompany, he did as such realizing that it would mean taking less pay and having a less steady profession. He felt, however, that it was vital to the business and medium in general to make diversions that incited distinctive enthusiastic reactions in the player than just energy or dread. While Chen isn't against making activity diversions, and his organization has made inside "energizing" amusements that were generally welcomed at Sony, he feels that there is no good reason for Thatgamecompany monetarily creating recreations like that as opposed to working for existing diversion designers, as they would not be making anything new that defended the expense of residual a free studio. Correspondingly, Chen does not plan for Thatgamecompany to make "enormous spending blockbuster diversions", as the weight on benefits that involves would smother the advancement that he needs Thatgamecompany to concentrate on. Chen trusts that for computer games to turn into a develop medium like film, the industry in general needs to make a wide scope of enthusiastic reactions to their recreations, like how film has spine chiller, sentiment, and satire classes dependent on the feelings they incite. He feels that there are just three different ways for computer games to affect grown-ups similarly they do kids: "mentally, whereby the work uncovers another point of view about the world that you have not seen previously," by "candidly contacting somebody," and "by making a social situation where the scholarly or passionate incitement could occur from other individuals."