2004 Indonesian authoritative race 

Indonesia held authoritative races on 5 April 2004 for the two places of the People's Consultative Assembly, the nation's national council. This incorporated each of the 550 seats in the People's Representative Council and 128 seats of the new Regional Representative Council. 

Last aftereffects of the well known vote count demonstrated that Golkar, the previous decision gathering of the New Order time, got the biggest number of votes. It had lost to the Indonesian Democratic Party – Struggle in the 1999 administrative decision. The Democratic Party and the Prosperous Justice Party, two of the most up to date gatherings to partake in the decisions, got a joined 14.8 percent of the prominent vote. 

In view of the last designation of seats in the People's Representative Council, Golkar, the Indonesian Democratic Party – Struggle, the National Awakening Party, the United Development Party, the Democratic Party, the Prosperous Justice Party, and the National Mandate Party were fit the bill to submit contender for the nation's initially immediate presidential decision later in the year. 

The race has been portrayed as the most convoluted decision ever of. 

Amid its 2002 yearly session, the People's Consultative Assembly (MPR) added 14 alterations to the Constitution of Indonesia. Incorporated into these revisions were measures to rearrange the lawmaking body. Starting in 2004, the MPR was made out of the current People's Representative Council (DPR) and another Regional Representative Council (DPD). Since every one of the seats in the MPR were legitimately chosen, this called for expulsion of the military from the governing body, whose 38 situates in the Assembly were selected. This change and a correction for direct decision of the President and Vice President were real strides for Indonesia out and about towards a full majority rule government. 

On 13 July 2003, President Megawati Sukarnoputri marked into impact a law sketching out the creation of the revamped MPR. The new DPD was made out of four agents from every one of the 32 regions of Indonesia, not totaling more than 33% of the individuals from the DPR. The reconsidered constitution additionally set participation in the DPR at 550. 

Amid the main periods of enrollment, 150 gatherings were enlisted with the Ministry of Justice and Human Rights. Be that as it may, this number was decreased to 50 and afterward 24 after examination from the recently made General Election Commission. This decrease from the 48 parties that remained in the 1999 authoritative decision was generally credited to new a race law that permitted just gatherings that had won two percent of seats in the DPR, or three percent of seats in commonplace and regental governing bodies in half of the territories to remain in the 2004 race. Just six gatherings met this necessity, and the rest of the gatherings were required to blend or redesign into another gathering. 

The crusade time frame for gatherings and competitors started on 11 March and proceeded until 1 April. It was part into two stages by Nyepi, the Balinese day of quiet. Gatherings conveyed their national motivation inside somewhere in the range of 11 and 25 March. In spite of the fact that this was intended to energize exchange among gatherings and their constituents, these occasions were ineffectively visited. The International Foundation for Electoral Systems directed a following review that told not all voters realized the best way to vote in favor of hopefuls of the new DPD, or were even mindful it existed. 

Up to 475,000 competitors were assigned by the ideological groups in the national, common, and regental levels. In excess of 1,200 hopefuls represented 128 seats in the DPD, and 7,756 applicants represented 550 seats in the DPR. Applicants were chosen in an open rundown framework. 

The decision results figured out which ideological groups were qualified to submit contender for Indonesia's initially immediate presidential race, which was hung on 5 July. Just gatherings that got five percent of the mainstream vote or three percent of seats in the People's Representative Council could submit applicants. Gatherings that did not meet these criteria hosted to unite with different gatherings to meet no less than one basis. 

Race day, 5 April, was moderately free of real occurrences and anomalies. Minor infringement included authorities helping older voters cast and submit polls. Two Indonesian decision authorities were additionally detailed executed while conveying casting a ballot hardware in Papua. The Australian Parliamentary Observer Delegation and the European Union Election Observer Mission were among the associations watching the decision. 

The tallying of votes took one month, and the last outcomes were declared on 5 May, multi week later than was at first booked. Of 148,000,369 enlisted voters, 124,420,339 tallies (84.06 percent) were submitted. Of these tallies, 113,462,414 were viewed as substantial, and 10,957,925 were proclaimed invalid. In the People's Representative Council, the Party of the Functional Groups (Golkar) got the most number of seats. It had recently lost to the Indonesian Democratic Party – Struggle in the 1999 administrative decision in the wake of being in power since 1970. Nonetheless, fourteen of the twenty-four taking an interest parties would not ensure the decision results after charges of sporadic vote tallying. 

! style="text-align:left;background-color:#E9E9E9"|Parties 

!style="text-align:center;background-color:#E9E9E9"|Votes 

!style="text-align:center;background-color:#E9E9E9; width: 3em;"|% 

!style="text-align:center;background-color:#E9E9E9; width: 3em;"|Seats 

!style="text-align:center;background-color:#E9E9E9; width: 3em;"|% 

!style="text-align:center;background-color:#E9E9E9; width: 3em;"|+/− 

To accomplish corresponding portrayal, situate designation was directed utilizing the biggest leftover portion technique, whereby the Hare share was utilized to decide situates consequently verified by individual gatherings. Any residual seats relegated to the discretionary district were allotted to staying ideological groups dependent on the rank request of their outstanding votes. 

A sum of 273 question were brought under the steady gaze of the Constitutional Court, the remainder of which were settled on 21 June. Of these cases, 38 choices influenced the last distribution of seats in the People's Representative Council and common and regental lawmaking bodies. The Democratic Party lost two seats, one to the National Mandate Party and Prosperous Peace Party each. The Pioneers' Party increased one seat from the United Democratic Nationhood Party. In the interim, the main seat allotted to the Freedom Bull National Party by the General Election Commission was reassigned to the Reform Star Party. 

After the goals all things considered, sixteen gatherings got somewhere around one seat in the People's Representative Council, while eight got none. The irregularity in the request of gatherings as indicated by votes got and situates designated emerged because of a unique standard made to address uneven populace appropriation among Java and different islands. This standard stipulates that the Hare amount esteems for the areas in Java were by and large higher than those for the external islands. A gathering require less votes to naturally verify a seat outside of Java. For instance, the National Awakening Party (PKB) got a larger number of votes than the National Mandate Party (PAN) yet got about a similar number of seats. The greater part of PKB seats were gotten in the gathering's fortress of East Java, where the quantity esteem was higher. Interestingly, just four of PAN seats were naturally verified. 

Results demonstrated that Golkar, the previous decision gathering of the New Order time driven by People's Representative Council Speaker Akbar Tanjung, had won the biggest number of seats, vanquishing President Megawati Sukarnoputri's Indonesian Democratic Party – Struggle (PDI–P). Golkar got a greater number of votes than different gatherings in twenty-six out of thirty-two territories. In any case, these outcomes happened as a result of declining PDI–P prevalence as opposed to an expansion in Golkar's ubiquity. Golkar's help in its conventional fortification of Sulawesi declined because of the execution of medium and little gatherings in the locale. Notwithstanding winning the biggest offer of vote by and by in Bali, PDI–P execution there endured the best after the 2002 bombings by fear monger bunch Jemaah Islamiyah crushed the island region's economy. 

Both the National Awakening Party (PKB) and the United Development Party (PPP), both of whom were viewed as Islamic gatherings, kept up their rankings in the People's Representative Council. The PKB, helped to establish by previous President and previous Nahdlatul Ulama Chairman Abdurrahman Wahid, kept on performing admirably in its fortification of East Java regardless of losing cast a ballot. 

The Islamic Prosperous Justice Party (PKS) and the Democratic Party (PD) completed first and second, separately, in Jakarta, where casting a ballot designs were considered a "gauge of Indonesian legislative issues". Together, the two gatherings got 42.5 percent of votes in the capital city. 

Polarization of casting a ballot designs dependent on religion was clear in the eastern regions. Christianity-based Prosperous Peace Party (PDS) got 14.8 percent of votes in Christian-predominant North Sulawesi and 13 seats by and large in the People's Representative Council. In like manner, Muslims were bound to vote in favor of the PKS in districts where religious clash has been generally common. 

The 2004 administrative race was the most confounded in Indonesian history since Indonesians needed to vote in favor of delegates at the national, common, and regental levels. These elements made Indonesia's discretionary framework one of a kind from different frameworks on the planet. The race was depicted as the longest and most confused decision ever of and verified the country's place as the world's third biggest majority rule government. Indeed, even preceding the decision, the seat allotment framework for the People's Representative Council was likewise considered "the most convoluted on the planet" by a few news sources the nation over. 

Seven ideological groups met the criteria to submit possibility for the July presidential race: Golkar, the Indonesian Democratic Party – Struggle (PDI–P), the National Awakening Party (PKB), the United Development Party (PPP), the Democratic Party (PD), the Prosperous Justice Party (PKS), and the National Mandate Party (PAN). The PKS was the main party not to assign applicants, yet it advocated PAN's Amien Rais. 

Recently chosen individuals from the People's Representative Council (DPR) and the Regional Representative Council (DPD) made the vow of office in independent sessions on 1 October, one day later than was planned. The two houses at that point gathered together in the early morning of 2 October and made the vow of office as the People's Consultative Assembly (MPR). Ginandjar Kartasasmita was chosen the debut executive of the DPD with 72 of 128 votes in a run-off against Irman Gusman on 1 October. The next day, Agung Laksono of Golkar was chosen Speaker of the DPR by a vote of 280 to 257. The Chairman of the MPR was not chosen until a few days after the fact, when Hidayat Nur Wahid of the PKS won the vote 326 to 324 against PDI–P's Sutjipto. 

On 5 October, three regimes were cut out of the territory of South Sulawesi to shape West Sulawesi as the 33rd area of Indonesia. Since this happened after the races, West Sulawesi was not spoken to in the Regional Representative Council until the 2009 administrative race.