Claw (crazy ride) 

Claw: The Grip of Fear, conversationally referred to just as Talon, is a steel altered crazy ride at Dorney Park and Wildwater Kingdom in Allentown, Pennsylvania, United States. It highlights 4 reversals and near the ground experiences. Planned by Bolliger and Mabillard, Talon was known to be one of the longest modified crazy rides in the Northeast when it opened in 2001. 

On April 28, 2000, Dorney Park declared that a four reversal transformed thrill ride would be worked for the 2001 season. No further subtleties were given until August 30, 2000 when Dorney Park declared the full subtleties of the new $13 million exciting ride and its name, Talon. The ride would be the Northeast's longest altered exciting ride and would be based on a segment of land put aside for a noteworthy fascination by Cedar Fair when they acquired the recreation center in 1992. Development started on September 5, 2000 and proceeded through the winter. The initial segments of Talon to be established were the brake run and move track in October 2000. The thrill ride was finished off (the most astounding bit of the lift slope) on November 21, 2000 and the track was finished in mid 2001. In the wake of testing was finished, Talon opened on May 5, 2001. 

Having dispatched from the station, the train quickly starts to climb the lift slope. Once at the top, the train experiences a pre-drop before making a sharp descending right turn. The train at that point enters a tall vertical circle. In the wake of leaving the circle, the train experiences a zero-gravity move before dropping back to the ground and entering an immelmann circle. The train at that point makes an entire 360-degree upward right transform pursued by a left transform driving into another drop. After the drop, the train makes exceedingly banked right transform into a level turn. Next, the train makes a left turn (very near the ground) before going to a broadcast appointment, and back up which leads into the brake run. Subsequent to leaving the brake run, the train makes a correct transform into a second, shorter, arrangement of brakes before entering the station. 

One cycle of the ride endures around 2 minutes. 

Claw works with two steel and fiberglass trains. Each train has eight vehicles that can situate four riders in a solitary line for a sum of 32 riders for every train. The train structure is shaded blue and turquoise, the seats are dark, and the over-the-bear limitations are yellow. 

The steel track of Talon is roughly long, the tallness of the lift is around high, and the whole track weighs simply under . It was made by Clermont Steel Fabricators situated in Batavia, Ohio. Dissimilar to other B&M napkins, the track is loaded up with sand to lessen the commotion delivered by the trains. Likewise, the track is painted orange and yellow while the backings are blue. 

The passageway sign has a smaller than normal trademark as "The Grip Of Fear. "Talon" is named after a hook, which is explicitly found on winged animals of prey and legendary animals. The ride is themed as a flying creature of prey.