Brilliant Sun: The Lost Age 

Getting the story amid the occasions of the past amusement, The Lost Age puts the player into the jobs of the past diversions' rivals, principally from the point of view of enchantment adjusted "adepts" Felix and his partners as they look to reestablish the intensity of speculative chemistry to the universe of Weyard. En route, the player utilizes psynergy to crush adversaries and find new areas, help out neighborhood populaces, and find natural djinn which enlarge the characters' forces. Players can exchange their characters and things from "Brilliant Sun" to "The Lost Age" by methods for a secret phrase framework or Game Link Cable, and players are remunerated for completely finishing the two amusements. 

Upon discharge, "The Lost Age" was decidedly gotten by faultfinders and gatherings of people. IGN positioned the diversion as the eighth-best Game Boy Advance title of 2003 and the 22nd-best GBA round ever. It has sold more than 680,000 units. It was in the long run pursued by a third portion, titled "", discharged in 2010 and set thirty years after the two unique diversions. 

"The Lost Age" displays a comparable customary pretending computer game equation that its first half spearheaded. Players manage a give of characters a role as they venture through a dream themed world, collaborate with different characters, fight beasts, secure progressively ground-breaking enchantment spells and hardware, and partake in a structure, predefined account. While numerous moves the player makes are obligatory and integral to the story, "The Lost Age" enables the player to finish numerous destinations in their preferred request; visiting past areas to propel story components and complete ongoing interaction goals are given a more grounded accentuation than in the past amusement. 

A great part of the time spent outside of fight happens either in the amusement's overworld or inside cells, caverns, and different districts with riddles coordinated into their format. In contrast to the first diversion, in which the overworld was investigated by walking aside from a brief, non-safe vessel ride, an extensive bit of "The Lost Age's" ongoing interaction includes exploring an otherworldly ship over a substantial ocean, visiting mainlands and islands. To finish confounds, players should either push columns to build debatable ways between raised regions, move up or plummet bluffs, or get an exceptional thing to advance through the story and diversion world. A large number of these riddles spin vigorously around the use of the game’s occupant type of enchantment spells, Psynergy, requiring the player to discover things that allow the carrier new types of Psynergy so as to achieve errands. Securing new Psynergy spells gives players access to new areas and insider facts covered up inside the amusement world. 

Though numerous pretending computer games limit the use of their types of enchantment to fights as hostile and cautious measures, Psynergy spells are likewise intensely utilized in riddles and investigation. A few sorts of Psynergy must be utilized in battle; on the other hand, a few spells are just utilized in the amusement's overworld and in non-fight situations. Still other Psynergy can be utilized for the two circumstances; for instance, the “Frost” spell can be utilized to harm foes in fight, or to change puddles of water into prolonged mainstays of ice as a component of a riddle. The player acquires and more Psynergy spells as the amusement advances, either through step up or obtaining and preparing, or utilizing, uncommon things, and with every "utility" Psynergy spell the gathering accesses more areas and privileged insights covered up inside the diversion world. Players will be required to come back to past areas in the amusement to complete off riddles which they couldn't unravel prior in view of the absence of explicit Psynergy spells. 

"The Lost Age" contains both arbitrary beast experiences and obligatory fights that advance the story. At the point when a fight starts, a different screen is raised where the foe party is on the contradicting side and the player’s party is on the doing combating side. While a fight being is led, the characters and foundation whirl around and change positions in a pseudo-3D impact. 

Ongoing interaction in connection to "The Lost Age's" fight mode is like conventional pretending computer games. In each fight, the player is required to vanquish every one of the adversaries utilizing direct assaults with weapons, hostile Psynergy spells, and different methods for causing harm, all while keeping their very own gathering alive through things and strong Psynergy that reestablish life and supplement resistance. In the event that all the player's characters are brought down by lessening their hit focuses to zero, the gathering is come back to the last town that the player visited and endures a money related punishment. The fruitful finish of a fight yields experience focuses, coins, and every so often uncommon things. Notwithstanding the principle diversion itself, there is additionally a focused engaging mode available from the menu screen, where players can enter their groups into a field to fight progressively troublesome CPU-controlled foes or different players straight on. 

A standout amongst the most critical highlights in the "Brilliant Sun" arrangement is the gathering and control of basic animals called Djinn (solitary: "Djinni"), and "The Lost Age" presents a large group of new Djinn. They can be discovered dispersed sequestered from everything all through the amusement. There are eleven Djinn for every one of the four components (not including the ones that must be found in the first Golden Sun) that might be distributed to each character. Djinn structure the premise of the game’s measurements upgrade framework, and the manner in which they are designated to various characters changes the characters' classes, expanding most extreme hit focuses, Psynergy focuses, and different insights, and furthermore adjusts the accessible Psynergy that the characters can perform. Djinni may likewise be utilized to legitimately assault a rival, and once utilized, Djinn never again add to a character’s class however can be utilized to gather an incredible natural soul to assault an adversary. This is the game’s most dominant technique for assault, and furthermore the least secure, as it expects Djinn to be on reserve and in this manner not accessible to reinforce the measurements of whichever character the Djinni is prepared to. When a Djinni on Standby has been utilized for a Summon Sequence, it takes various turns recuperating before it reestablishes itself to Set position on a character, yet a resulting increment in the partiality of the component of the assault is supported on the character for the term of the fight. 

For a great part of the diversion, the player controls four characters: Felix is an eighteen-year-old Venus Adept from the town of Vale, who was a wannabe in "Brilliant Sun" yet fills in as the amusement's new hero. His more youthful sister, Jenna, a seventeen-year-old Mars Adept additionally from Vale, and a fourteen-year-old young lady and Jupiter Adept named Sheba, just as a sharp-witted older researcher named Kraden, are for the most part prisoners that Felix was compelled to take with his currently perished experts, the Mars Adept warriors Saturos and Menardi that filled in as the past diversion's foes. In this amusement, the player plays the job of Felix as he endeavors to finish Saturos and Menardi's unique target to reestablish Alchemy to the universe of Weyard, and going along with them right off the bat is a Mercury Adept named Piers, a puzzling young fellow whose transport Felix's gathering uses to investigate the world all through their adventure. 

A few gatherings of characters fill in as Felix's rivals in "The Lost Age". He is inconsistent with the saints of the first "Brilliant Sun", driven by the youthful Venus Adept warrior Isaac, who seek after him over the World, Weyard under the conviction that Alchemy would conceivably pulverize Weyard whenever released. One of Saturos' unique sidekicks, an incredible and mysterious Mercury Adept named Alex, aligns himself with a second pair of amazing and forcing Mars Adept warriors, Karst and Agatio. They keep the weight on Felix to guarantee he continues with his mission as he should. 

"The Lost Age" happens in a similar dreamland as its antecedent, that of the universe of "Weyard". It is a level, dubiously round plane whose seas unendingly spill off the edge of the world's whole border into what is by all accounts an interminable pit, albeit nobody comprehends what is over it. 

The adversaries of the past diversion, Saturos and Menardi, have been killed fighting by the amusement's heroes driven by Isaac, yet not before the pair prevailing with regards to actuating two of four incredible beacons arranged over the universe of Weyard, the Elemental Lighthouses. Saturos' sidekick Felix takes the remainder of Saturos' gathering and sets out on his very own voyage to finish Saturos' unique target to enact the staying two Lighthouses, for lighting every one of the four will accomplish the reclamation of the incredible power of Alchemy to Weyard. He is joined by his sister Jenna, a Jupiter Adept named Sheba who was recently grabbed by Saturos, and the researcher Kraden. The gathering looks for a ship to cross toward the western portion of Weyard, and learns of a man named Piers who has been erroneously blamed for robbery and possesses a ship they can utilize. Felix and his gathering demonstrate his innocence, and Piers consents to go along with them. Amid this present, Isaac's gathering keeps on pursueing them. The gathering likewise finds that their previous sidekick Alex has aligned himself with Menardi's more youthful sister Karst and her accomplice Agatio so as to keep Felix on track. 

In the end, Felix's gathering can accomplish entrance into Piers' home, an unbelievable, separated Atlantis-like society named Lemuria out of sight the sea. When they gather with Lemuria's antiquated lord, Hydros, they find out about Alchemy's actual nature; it has dependably been the sustenance of Weyard's very life power, and its nonappearance over the past ages has made the world's mainlands decline in size and parts of the world to crumple into the pit. Realizing that reestablishing Alchemy is the thing that must be done to really spare the world, Felix crosses the ocean so as to enact Jupiter Lighthouse. In any case, when Isaac's seeking after gathering enters the beacon, they are caught and trapped by Karst and Agatio. Felix salvages Isaac, yet Karst and Agatio escape with the Mars Star in the past in Isaac's ownership. 

Felix is at long last ready to disclose to Isaac why Alchemy's discharge is a vital thing for everybody, and that Saturos and Menardi were going for this objective just for the survival of their home settlement of Prox to the far north, situated close to the Mars Lighthouse. He likewise uncovers that his folks and Isaac's dad are alive and right now being held prisoner in Prox so as to force Felix's underlying collaboration. Isaac and his organization consent to help Felix, and the gathering sets out north to enact the Mars Lighthouse. The gathering finds that Karst and Agatio have been changed into thoughtless mythical serpents and are compelled to crush them - they return the Mars Star before capitulating to their injuries. When they achieve the pinnacle's top, the Wise One, the element in charge of initially entrusting Isaac to forestall the breaking of Alchemy's seal, defies them. He cautions them that humanity could devastate Weyard themselves in the event that they had ownership of such a power, and when Isaac demands breaking the seal in any case the Wise One calls a goliath, three-set out monster toward the gathering to fight in the last battle. In the wake of killing the winged serpent, the gathering of Adepts complete their goal and initiate Mars Lighthouse; with each of the four towers crosswise over Weyard lit, the procedure that proclaims the arrival of the power of Alchemy to Weyard results at the mountain sanctum Mt. Aleph. Alex is there, in any case; he exploited every other person's missions so he would increase gigantic power for himself from the light of the Golden Sun, a sign of Alchemy itself. In any case, he finds that the Wise One had found a way to avert this and is left beyond words the mountain crumples and sinks into the ground with him still on it. 

"The Lost Age" was first uncovered to Japan in mid 2002, with the magazine "Famitsu" being the principal distribution to survey the diversion. "The Lost Age" was profoundly foreseen; it bested IGN's rundown of Game Boy Advance "Most Wanted" diversions for 2003. The North American rendition of the amusement was playable at Electronic Entertainment Expo 2002, and IGN noticed that the opening of the diversion got rid of the famously exhausting opening succession of "Brilliant Sun", presenting the characters in the middle of the activity. GameSpot saw a confined duplicate of "The Lost Age" in February 2003, and noticed that the amusement based on its ancestor's illustrations motor, with "the situations in the diversion highlighting rich detail with little touches—, for example, feathered creatures that take off as you approach." 

"The Lost Age" for the most part gotten positive audits, yet pundits were isolated on whether the amusement was superior to the first "Brilliant Sun". 

On Metacritic, "The Lost Age" has a 86% total rating, contrasted with "Brilliant Sun's" 91%. Moreover, GameRankings gives "The Lost Age" a 87% generally speaking rating, somewhat lower than "Brilliant Sun's" 90%. On the other hand, "The Lost Age" was positioned 78 on IGN's Readers Choice Top 100 recreations ever, higher than its antecedent. It was additionally appraised the 69th best diversion made on a Nintendo System in "Nintendo Power's" "Top 200 Games" list. 

IGN gave the continuation high recognition; while a large portion of the diversion mechanics stayed unaltered, the expansion of progressively entangled riddles was invited. "The Lost Age" in this way turned into IGN's "Round of the Month" in April 2003. Shane Bettenhausen of "Electronic Gaming Monthly" contended that however "The Lost Age" is "not going to win any innovation challenges (this looks, sounds, and feels almost indistinguishable to its ancestor), yet when business as usual methods progressively choice pretending, I can't gripe". Different productions singled out the designs and sound as especially solid highlights. 

A few distributions criticized grievances which stayed from the first, including the battle framework. IGN and "GamePro" disagreed with the absence of "shrewd" battle; if a foe is slaughtered before other gathering individuals assault it, those individuals change to resistance rather than insightfully assaulting the rest of the foes. Ethan Einhorn of "GameNOW" felt that the main components that set the battling framework above "common RPG passage" were the designs. GameSpy felt that Camelot could have included more highlights, and censured the long opening grouping which either estranged players of the past amusement, or befuddled new players by overwhelming them with new places and characters. 

"The Lost Age" sold 96,000 units in its first week in Japan, being the top of the line round of the period. The diversion sold an aggregate of 249,000 duplicates in Japan and 437,000 in North America by November 21, 2004.