Biblical Faith Mission of South Africa 

The Apostolic Faith Mission of South Africa (AFM) is a traditional Pentecostal Christian section in South Africa. With 1.2 million followers, it is South Africa's biggest Pentecostal church and the fifth biggest religious gathering in South Africa speaking to 7.6 percent of the populace. Dr. Isak Burger has driven the AFM as president since 1996 when the white and dark parts of the congregation were joined together. It is an individual from the Apostolic Faith Mission International, a cooperation of 23 AFM national temples. It is additionally an individual from the South African Council of Churches. 

The AFM is one of the most seasoned Pentecostal development is South Africa with roots in the Azusa Street Revival, the Holiness Movement lessons of Andrew Murray and the lessons of John Alexander Dowie. The AFM had an interracial character when it began, be that as it may, as in American Pentecostalism, this interracial participation was fleeting. The decades from the 1950s to the 1980s were set apart by the usage of politically-sanctioned racial segregation. After 1994, the white AFM moved quickly towards unification with the dark places of worship. By 1996, all the AFM houses of worship were joined in a solitary multi-racial church. 

The constitution of the AFM mixes at the national dimension the components of a presbyterian nation with an episcopal nation. Decentralization is a noteworthy element of its constitution, which enables neighborhood houses of worship to build up their own strategies. The Apostolic Faith Mission shows an assortment of personalities and service rationalities, including searcher delicate, Word of Faith, Presbyterian, and established Pentecostal. 

While the Apostolic Faith Mission was established in 1908 and Pentecostalism conveyed to South Africa by American preachers, a few elements made a great atmosphere for the Pentecostal development to spread in the nation. To start with, recoveries in the Dutch Reformed Church in South Africa (DRC) in 1860, 1874 and 1884 were described by profound conviction of transgression pursued by change, intense petition and some delighted marvel. In this way in 1908, some more established DRC individuals were natural and open to Pentecostalism. Second, the Dutch Reformed priest Andrew Murray was a noticeable blessedness instructor and made an atmosphere for restoration. A third factor was the Zionist places of worship, driven by John Alexander Dowie from Zion City, Illinois, United States. 

In May 1908, five American missionaries—John G. Lake and Thomas Hezmalhalch, alongside their spouses, and A. Lehman—arrived in South Africa from Indianapolis. Lake and Hezmalhalch had connections to Dowie's Zion City and had been submersed in the Holy Spirit at the Azusa Street Mission in Los Angeles. In spite of these impacts, be that as it may, the ministers had no authoritative alliance. Landing in Pretoria, Lake felt that the Holy Spirit was driving him to Johannesburg since they found no entryways open in Pretoria. In Johannesburg, a Mrs Goodenough met them and welcomed them to remain in her home. She saw that the Holy Spirit had sent her to the train station to meet the American teachers. They initially started service at a rental corridor in Doornfontein, a Johannesburg suburb, on 25 May 1908. The administrations comprised of a blended racial gathering, and numerous who went to the primary administrations were Zionists. The evangelists moved to the Central Tabernacle, Bree Street, Johannesburg as the youthful Pentecostal development developed. It was there that the Apostolic Faith Mission grew, at first as a board of trustees first gathering in September 1908. It was not enrolled as a legitimate element until 1913, be that as it may. 

By 1909, it had spread to the Orange River Colony. In South Africa, as at Azusa Street, the development was at first multi-racial, engaging the two Boers and blacks. It extended quickly among African ranch laborers in the Orange River Colony and Wakkerstroom, where Pentecostal convictions in awesome mending through supplication would have made it an appealing option in contrast to customary or restorative treatment. Lake reached the Wakkerstroom Zionists driven by Pieter Louis Le Roux, and numerous Zionists joined the Apostolic Faith Mission. Their impact can be found in the AFM's routine with regards to absolution by triple submersion, when each for the sake of the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Spirit. There was likewise association with different houses of worship, for example, the Plymouth Brethren and International Holiness development, which regularly brought about people or entire gatherings joining the AFM. Most AFM changes over, in any case, originated from the Dutch Reformed places of worship. 

The AFM was a self-proliferating development right off the bat because of the fruitful evangelism of Boer and African proselytes. In 1909, Lake wrote to "The Upper Room", an American Pentecostal diary, that preachers were not required as the AFM had men "far better than any that can emerge out of America . . . who can communicate in English, Dutch, Zulu, and Basuto". Towns and mining mixes were prime zones for preacher movement, reflected by the way that 69 percent of AFM individuals lived in urban zones in 1928. From urban focuses, the AFM spread to country zones through returning work vagrants or local ministers. 

The interracial character of the AFM was, similar to American Pentecostalism, brief. One clarification for this move was pressures over monetary challenge between less fortunate whites and blacks. In July 1909, it was chosen that immersions of whites, blacks, and coloreds would be discrete. Lake even tended to the South African Parliament, which he instructed to embrace an arrangement concerning racial isolation like the strategy for Native Americans in the United States. An all white official board controlled the development, and a different council, likewise white controlled, was in charge of organizing the "dark work". This circumstance would prompt many dark severances from the AFM bringing about the arrangement of African Initiated Churches, yet the congregation would keep on having a huge dark voting demographic, who kept on practicing extensive self-sufficiency in their nearby places of worship. As the AFM received the "little girl places of worship" way to deal with missions from the Dutch Reformed holy places, in the long run the AFM was partitioned into four fundamental groupings: the white parent church, an extensive dark little girl church, a hued girl church and an Indian little girl church. 

As indicated by Barry Morton, "An examination of the teacher vocation of John G. Lake demonstrates that the underlying spread of Pentecostalism and Zionism in southern Africa was encouraged by the efficient utilization of misrepresentation and duplicity". Morton refers to instances of misappropriation of AFM reserves and the arranging of supernatural healings. 

The arrival of Lake and Hezmalhalch to America was an essential defining moment for the AFM. Le Roux was chosen its leader in 1913, a job he filled until 1943. Amid his authority, the AFM removed itself from the dark Zionist development with its unmistakable taboos and dress and started looking to the Dutch Reformed legacy and decency. Amid his authority an extensive bit of the AFM's African voting demographic pulled back in 1919. Another split happened in 1928 when Maria Fraser drove various AFM individuals to pull back and structure the Latter Rain Mission in South Africa. She and her supporters, known as "Blourokkies" (Blue Dresses) for the dresses worn by female disciples, underlined Holy Spirit-roused prescience to a degree seen as exploitative, over the top and unsafe by AFM authorities. The development did, be that as it may, add to a re-accentuation on the work and nearness of the Holy Spirit in the congregation and service. 

After getting to be general secretary in 1935, David du Plessis regulated a procedure of standardization from which a solid organization created, coordinated by an inexorably instructed authority. It additionally had the impact of diminishing the job of the common people in the administration of the division. He is viewed as the dad of the "New Order" of AFM ceremony which called for progressively "decent" and less outgoing Pentecostal faith gatherings. By the 1940s, the straightforward lobbies that once housed AFM gatherings had been supplanted by structures demonstrated on Dutch Reformed design. Older folks and elders were presented in 1945, and by the 1960s relations between the AFM and Dutch Reformed holy places had improved. 

While du Plessis supported nearer ties with the different Afrikaans houses of worship during the 60s, the AFM suited to South Africa's politically-sanctioned racial segregation framework. This push toward Afrikaner Nationalist help was driven by AFM VP Gerrie Wessels, who turned into a National Party congressperson in 1955. Amid this time, the AFM (in spite of its expansive dark, shaded, English and Indian enrollment) started to be talked about as the "Fourth Afrikaans church" after South Africa's three Reformed houses of worship. 

Be that as it may, not every person was happy with the new formal and political bearings of the AFM. Wessel's political binds prompted the radicalization of more youthful dark ministers, the loss of most of the English enrollment, and a noteworthy division of Afrikaner individuals who did not share his political perspectives. These Afrikaners couldn't help contradicting Wessel politically as well as with du Plessis formally. In 1958, they parted from the AFM and shaped the Pentecostal Protestant Church. 

Since 1919, the dark, hued, and Indian areas of the AFM had created as independent "little girl houses of worship" or "mission holy places". These were, be that as it may, subject to the white church; the AFM's missions director was the ex officio administrator of the little girl temples' Workers and Executive gatherings. After 1991, the white and dark places of worship stayed independent, however blacks were made legitimate individuals out of the blue. In 1996, the two segments met up to end up one operational unit, and the congregation's recently chosen president, Isak Burger, apologized for the past treatment of non-whites. 

The AFM is a developing church that organize church planting and development. It has spread to all towns and towns in South Africa. In excess of 2000 congregations and branch gatherings have been built up. 

Neighborhood places of worship inside the Apostolic Faith Mission show an assortment of characters and service methods of insight, including searcher touchy, Word of Faith, Presbyterian, and traditional Pentecostal. The convictions of the Apostolic Faith Mission are explained in its Confession of Faith: 

The AFM is a Pentecostal church and its ceremony mirrors the happy and experiential practices found in comparative chapels around the world. Yelling, antiphonal singing, concurrent and unconstrained supplication and move are still ordinarily found in the love administrations. 

The request of administration is like other Pentecostal holy places, for instance the Assemblies of God. There is no formal request of administration, however most houses of worship pursue a daily schedule of congregational singing, an offering/tithe accumulation, supplication, a lesson and a special stepped area call. Amid the administration, gatherers may work in different profound blessings, for example, a message in tongues, a prediction and useful tidbits or information, as motivated by the Holy Spirit. Amid the congregational singing piece of an administration, a believer’s frame of mind of love is frequently communicated through bringing their hands up in the orans act. 

Standard administrations are commonly hung on Sunday mornings and nights. Amid the week, there are some of the time petition or little gathering gatherings and different kinds of social events. 

In 2000, the Apostolic Faith Mission embraced another constitution which at the national dimension mixes components of its prior presbyterian commonwealth with the "New Apostolic Paradigm", which moved it towards an episcopal nation. As indicated by this reasoning, fruitful, demonstrated Christian pioneers and ministers satisfy the job of witnesses. At the neighborhood level, decentralization is the significant impact of this new constitution, which enables nearby houses of worship to build up their own strategies. In the appropriation of its new constitution, the AFM looked to the Assemblies of God in Australia as a model. 

Capabilities for enrollment are that one be conceived once more, immersed, perceived as an individual from a nearby get together (church) and hold fast to the Confession of Faith. Nearby gatherings are driven by a minister and administering body, of which the minister is a part. Notwithstanding being an individual from the administering body, the minister is the get together's pioneer and "vision transporter". The administering body chooses ministers. 

Neighborhood gatherings are sorted out into geological locales. Local authority discussions are agent bodies comprising of ministers and delegates from every nearby get together. At regular intervals, every discussion chooses a territorial board of trustees from among its individuals and a provincial head from among its ministers. The board of trustees goes about as an official and warning body to the territorial initiative gathering. Every locale is spoken to by its pioneer on the National Leadership Forum. Non-land districts, as systems of neighborhood places of worship that share an unconventional service reasoning, likewise exist. These are ordinarily driven by the senior ministers of urban super chapels, who coordinate with various nearby gatherings across the country that seek them for authority and mentorship. 

The AFM's national agent body is the triennial General Business Meeting. Its primary capacity is the race of the national officers: president, appointee president, general secretary and general treasurer. The four national officers dependably speak to the noteworthy ethnic gatherings inside the congregation. Every neighborhood get together is qualified for send a minister and a representative as casting a ballot individuals. Extra casting a ballot individuals are individuals from the National Leadership Forum, individuals from standing boards of trustees, one extra part speaking to each congregation division and one extra agent of the congregation's religious preparing establishments. Prior to 2000, the General Business Meeting was known as the Workers Council, met every year, and had more noteworthy power. After the selection of the new constitution, a large portion of the body's capacity was exchanged to the National Leadership Forum. 

The National Leadership Forum, once known as the Executive Council, is the AFM's strategy making body and the "gatekeeper of doctrinal, moral and ceremonial issues in the congregation". It licenses ministers, sets benchmarks for pastoral preparing and settles question. It likewise assembles the yearly National Leadership Conference and the General Business Meeting. While it has capacity to make and execute guidelines, more than 50 percent of the local initiative gatherings can veto a guideline inside 90 days of its section by the National Leadership Forum. The National Leadership Forum's individuals are the national officers, the territorial heads, pioneers of chapel offices and a delegate of the AFM's religious preparing foundations. It might name extra individuals at its carefulness. The authoritative undertakings of the national church are under the oversight of the national officers. 

Religious preparing in the AFM was done at four grounds. Minister M.A. Vilakazi was the minister of the Theological Institute of Soshanguve north of Pretoria. Minister. A. Govender was the minister of the AFMTS Covenant Campus in Durban. Minister J.R. de Beer was the main of the Sarepta Theological College in Kuils Rivier, Cape Town. Prof. Jan Hattingh was the minister of the Auckland Park Theological Seminary in Auckland Park, Johannesburg. These preparation organizations are being joined together, as chosen by the General Business meeting of the AFM in 2007. The unification procedure brought division between the ATS Auckland Park Theological Seminary and the AFM. The ATS enlistment status was pulled back by the DHE and understudies who entered since 2015 was considered by the AFM as "pipeline" understudies which implies that they are given a beauty period to finish their religious capabilities. The AFM's new way to deal with the preparation of their ministers is to select them at North-West University because of its association with them.