Short-tail stingray 

The short-tail stingray or smooth stingray ("Bathytoshia brevicaudata") is a typical types of stingray in the family Dasyatidae. It happens off southern Africa, regularly seaward at a profundity of , and off southern Australia and New Zealand, from the intertidal zone to a profundity of . It is generally base abiding in nature and can be found over a scope of living spaces from estuaries to reefs, yet in addition every now and again swims into vast water. The biggest stingray on the planet, this overwhelming bodied species develops upwards of crosswise over and in weight. Its plain-shaded, precious stone molded pectoral blade circle is described by an absence of dermal denticles even in grown-ups, and white pores close to the head on either side. Its tail is generally shorter than the plate and thick at the base. It is furnished with huge tubercles and a midline column of vast thistles before the stinging spine which has the dorsal and ventral balance creases behind. 

The eating routine of the short-tail stingray comprises of spineless creatures and hard fishes, including tunneling and midwater species. It will in general stay inside a moderately constrained territory consistently, leaning toward more profound waters amid the winter, and isn't known to perform long movements. Extensive accumulations of beams structure regularly at specific areas, for example, in the late spring at the Poor Knight Islands off New Zealand. Both birthing and mating have been reported inside the accumulations at Poor Knights. This species is aplacental viviparous, with the creating incipient organisms continued by histotroph ("uterine milk") delivered by the mother; the litter size is six to 10. The short-tail stingray isn't forceful, yet is fit for dispensing a possibly deadly twisted with its long, venomous sting. It is gotten by chance by business and recreational fisheries all through its range, normally getting by to be discharged. Since its populace does not seem compromised by human movement, the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) has recorded it under least concern. 

The first portrayal of the short-tail stingray was made by Frederick Wollaston Hutton, custodian of the Otago Museum, from a female example crosswise over got off Dunedin in New Zealand. He distributed his record in a 1875 issue of the logical diary "Archives and Magazine of Natural History", in which he named the new species "Trygon brevicaudata", got from the Latin "brevis" ("short") and "cauda" ("tail"). Albeit since quite a while ago doled out to "Dasyatis", late work by Last et al. (2016) restored "Bathytoshia" for it and the wide stingray, just as the roughtail stingray. The short-tail stingray may likewise be alluded to as goliath dark beam, monster stingray, New Zealand short-tail stingaree, Schreiners beam, short-followed stingaree, shorttail dark stingray, and smooth short-followed stingray. It is firmly identified with the comparative looking however littler set stingray ("Dasyatis matsubarai") of the northwestern Pacific. 

Vigorously manufactured and typically smooth, the pectoral balance plate of the short-tail stingray has a somewhat rakish, rhomboid shape and is marginally more extensive than long. The main edges of the plate are in all respects tenderly arched, and unite on an unpolished, comprehensively triangular nose. The eyes are little and promptly pursued by a lot bigger spiracles. The broadly separated nostrils are long and limited; between them is a short, skirt-molded window ornament of skin with a bordered back edge. The unobtrusively measured mouth has an equitably curved lower jaw, unmistakable notches at the corners, and five to seven papillae (areola like structures) on the floor. Extra, modest papillae are dispersed on the nasal window ornament and outside the lower jaw. The teeth are masterminded with a quincunx design into smoothed surfaces; every tooth is little and obtuse, with a generally precious stone molded base. About 45–55 tooth lines are in either jaw. The pelvic balances are to some degree substantial and adjusted at the tips. 

The tail is typically shorter than the plate and bears one, here and there two, serrated stinging spines on the upper surface, most of the way along its length. It is wide and straightened until the base of the sting; after, it decreases quickly and a noticeable ventral balance crease runs nearly to the sting tip, just as a low dorsal edge. Dermal denticles are just found on the tail, with somewhere around one thistle showing up on the tail base by a circle width of . Grown-ups have a midline line of huge, in reverse pointing, skewer like thistles or leveled tubercles before the sting, just as a lot littler, tapered thistles behind the sting covering the tail to the tip. The dorsal tinge is grayish darker, obscuring towards the tip of the tail or more the eyes, with a line of white pores flanking the head on either side. The underside is whitish, obscuring towards the balance edges and underneath the tail. Pale skinned person people have been accounted for. The short-tail stingray is the biggest stingray species, known to reach at any rate in width, long, and in weight. Dependable spectators off New Zealand have revealed locating people nearly over. Develop females are about a third bigger than develop guys. 

The short-tail stingray is normal and generally circulated in the calm waters of the Southern Hemisphere. Off southern Africa, it has been accounted for from Cape Town in South Africa to the mouth of the Zambezi River in Mozambique. Along the southern Australian coast, it is found from Shark Bay in Western Australia to Maroochydore in Queensland, including Tasmania. In New Zealand waters, it happens off North Island and the Chatham Islands, and infrequently off South Island and the Kermadec Islands. Records from northern Australia and Thailand likely speak to misidentifications of "Himantura fai" and "D. matsubarai", separately. In the course of recent decades, its range and numbers off southeastern Tasmania have developed, perhaps because of environmental change. 

Off southern Africa, the short-tail stingray is uncommon in shallow water and frequently found over seaward banks at a profundity of . Nonetheless, off Australia and New Zealand, it is found from the intertidal zone to no more profound than . Australian and New Zealand beams are most copious in the shallows amid the late spring. A following report led on two New Zealand beams proposes that they move to more profound waters amid the winter, however don't attempt long-remove relocations. The short-tail stingray is for the most part base staying in nature, possessing an assortment of situations including harsh estuaries, shielded sounds and bays, sandy pads, rough reefs, and the external mainland rack. Be that as it may, it likewise makes customary invasions upward into the center of the water segment. 

The short-tail stingray is normally moderate moving, however can accomplish abrupt blasts of speed, fluttering its pectoral blades with enough power to cavitate the water and make a capable of being heard "blast". It is known to frame extensive regular accumulations; a notable model happens each late spring (January to April) at the Poor Knights Islands off New Zealand, especially under the rough passages. In certain zones, it moves with the rising tide into exceptionally shallow water. Individual beams will in general remain inside a moderately little home range with a span of under . Hostage tests have appeared equipped for recognizing attractive fields through its electroreceptive ampullae of Lorenzini, which in nature might be utilized for route. 

The short-tail stingray scavenges for nourishment both amid the day and around evening time. It encourages basically on benthic hard fishes and spineless creatures, for example, molluscs and shellfish. The horizontal line framework on its underside enables it to recognize the moment water planes created by covered bivalves and spoon worms, which are then extricated by suction; the abundance water is ousted through the spiracles. Fishes and spineless creatures from vast water, including salps and hyperiid amphipods, are additionally eaten in huge amounts. Off South Africa, this beam has been watched watching the egg beds of the chokka squid ("Loligo vulgaris reynaudii") amid mass spawnings, catching squid that plunge to the base to bring forth. The short-tail stingray has couple of predators because of its size; these incorporate the copper shark ("Carcharhinus brachyurus"), the smooth hammerhead ("Sphyrna zygaena"), the extraordinary white shark ("Carcharodon carcharias"), and the executioner whale ("Orcinus orca"). Whenever compromised, it raises its tail warningly over its back like a scorpion. Littler fishes have been watched utilizing swimming beams for spread while chasing their own prey. Known parasites of this species incorporate the nematode "Echinocephalus overstreeti", and the monogeneans "Heterocotyle tokoloshei" and "Dendromonocotyle" sp. 

The mid year accumulations of the short-tail stingray at the Poor Knights Islands appear to at any rate somewhat fill a regenerative need, as both mating and birthing have been seen among the assembled beams. Romance and mating happen in midwater, and the rising momentum streaming constantly through the thin openings is thought to help the beams in keeping up their position. Each open female might be trailed by a few guys, which endeavor to nibble and hold her plate. A couple of guys might be hauled by the female for a considerable length of time before she consents; the effective male flips upsidedown underneath her, embeddings one of his claspers into her vent and musically waving his tail from side to side. Lovemaking keeps going 3–5 minutes. Females in bondage have been watched mating with up to three distinct guys in progression. 

Like different stingrays, the short-tail stingray is aplacental viviparous; when the creating incipient organisms exhaust their yolk supply, they are provisioned with histotroph ("uterine milk", improved with proteins, lipids, and bodily fluid) created by the mother and conveyed through specific augmentations of the uterine epithelium called "trophonemata". Females bear litters of six to 10 puppies in the late spring; guys seem to aid the procedure by pushing the female's mid-region with their noses. Females are prepared to mate again not long after conceiving an offspring. Babies measure over. 

Inquisitive and unaggressive, the short-tail stingray may approach people and can be prepared to be hand-bolstered. At Hamelin Bay in Western Australia, some short-tail stingrays, thorntail stingrays ("D. thetidis"), and Australian bull beams ("Myliobatis australis") normally accumulate to be hand-encouraged fish scraps; the quantity of guests has relentlessly expanded as of late, and intrigue exists in building up the site as a perpetual vacation destination. Notwithstanding, whenever frightened or bugged, this species is fit for dispensing a genuine, even deadly twisted with its sting. The sting can quantify over long and infiltrate most sorts of footwear, including kevlar bootees, and its mucous sheath contains a poison that causes rot. The most hazardous wounds include harm to an indispensable organ, gigantic blood misfortune, or potentially optional septicemia or lockjaw. Sometimes, a surprised beam may jump through water, and penetrate a wader's chest depression. This species is in charge of most of stingray wounds off New Zealand. The most scandalous episode was the passing of Steve Irwin when a stingray pierced his heart with its pointed tail. 

All through its range, the short-tail stingray is gotten by chance by different business fisheries utilizing trawls, Danish and satchel seines, longlines and set lines, and drag and set nets. It is additionally gotten by recreational fishers utilizing snare and-line (from pontoons or the shore), lances, and spears. Most people got are discharged alive; frequently, fishers remove their tails previously for wellbeing, however this training does not appear to significantly affect the beams' long haul survival. Game fishers sometimes keep caught beams for meat or calculating rivalries; a couple are additionally kept for showcase in open aquariums, and they have duplicated in imprisonment. As it endures angling exercises well and stays regular all through its range, the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) has surveyed the short-tail stingray as least concern. Inside a large portion of this present species' range off New Zealand, focusing on it financially is restricted. In June 2018 the New Zealand Department of Conservation grouped the short-tail stingray as "Not Threatened" with the qualifier "Secure Overseas" under the New Zealand Threat Classification System.