Subtropical Storm Nicole 

Subtropical Storm Nicole was the main subtropical tempest to get a name utilizing the standard typhoon name list that did not turn into a tropical violent wind. The fifteenth tropical or subtropical violent wind and fourteenth named tempest of the 2004 Atlantic typhoon season, Nicole created on October 10 close Bermuda from a wide surface low that created because of the communication between an upper dimension trough and a rotting cold front. The tempest swung toward the upper east, passing near Bermuda as it increased to achieve top breezes of 50â mph (85 Â km/h) on October 11. Profound convection created close to the focal point of the framework as it endeavored to turn into a completely tropical violent wind. Nonetheless, it neglected to do as such and was consumed by an extratropical violent wind late on October 11. 

Nicole dropped moderate measures of precipitation in Bermuda, while harsh oceans caused issues for voyage lines. In Canada, the remainders of the tempest joined with an extratropical tempest to create solid breezes and substantial precipitation, which made harm trees and electrical cables. The remainder storm additionally created powerful breezes crosswise over New England, while swells from the tempest gave welcome surf conditions along the East Coast of the United States. 

An upper-level trough and a rotting cold front endured over the western Atlantic Ocean toward the beginning of October. The communication between the two prompted the arrangement of a region of low weight on October 8 toward the southwest of Bermuda. The framework came up short on a solitary well-characterized flow, however it had intense breezes as it moved northwestward. The framework bit by bit turned out to be better composed, and however there were no indications of tropical improvement on October 9, PC models recommended a subtropical tempest could shape. On October 10, a well-characterized low-level dissemination created as a band of mists framed in the northern segment of the framework. Presently, bended groups created in the northwestern segment of the middle, while the most grounded breezes related with the tempest happened more than 115â miles (185â km) from the inside. In light of the wide wind field and the cloud signature, it is assessed the framework sorted out into Subtropical Storm Nicole on October 10 while situated about 140â miles (225â km) southwest of Bermuda. 

The principal National Hurricane Center conjecture on Nicole noticed the improvement of convection over the western segment of the inside, and that if the pattern kept, changing into a tropical violent wind would be conceivable. The main dialog likewise anticipated a pinnacle force of 65â mph (105â km/h). A mid-level trough turned the tempest northeastward, and at an opportune time October 11 it go about 60â miles (95â km) northwest of Bermuda. Soon after passing Bermuda, Nicole created persevering profound convection close to the middle, while Advanced Microwave Sounding Unit bridges demonstrated the capability of a warm center inside the framework. In spite of the fact that Nicole endeavored to get tropical attributes, solid upper-level breeze shear avoided the change. As the tempest quickened northeastward affected by a substantial extratropical tornado south of Nova Scotia, it quickly achieved pinnacle winds of 50â mph (85â km/h). Late on October 11, the dissemination of Nicole wound up unclear from the bigger extratropical violent wind, and warnings on the framework were ended at 18:00Â UTC as Nicole was consumed by the extratropical twister. 

On October 9, one day before the tempest's arrangement, the Bermuda Weather Service issued a storm cautioning for the island. The office additionally issued a Tropical Storm Watch soon after the tempest created. All admonitions were dropped after the tempest passed the island. Winds on Bermuda topped at 44â mph (71â km/h) in relationship with Nicole, while blasts crested at 60â mph (97â km/h) preceding the tempest creating. Nicole and the forerunner extratropical storm dropped substantial precipitation, adding up to 5.86â inches (148â mm) over a three-day time span at the Bermuda International Airport. Rainstorms were likewise given an account of the island. Poor climate conditions from Nicole constrained the retraction of a few occasions at the vacationer driven Bermuda Music Festival, including acts by Isaac Hayes, Gerald Albright, and Anita Baker. Solid breezes thumped down electrical cables, leaving more than 1,800 homes and organizations without power. Agitated conditions additionally brought about airplane terminal postponements. High breezes deferred or adjusted the courses of four voyage ships. High floods of 10 to 12 feet (3 to 3.6 m) in stature left a few voyage dispatch travelers nauseous; one wiped out traveler was hurried to a nearby medical clinic on Bermuda. 

The Canadian Hurricane Center issued seven notices on the tempest, however the framework just quickly entered the inside's reaction zone before it scattered. Because of dampness from Nicole joined with the extratropical storm, the Atlantic Storm Prediction Center issued substantial precipitation and wind alerts for extensive bits of the Canadian Maritimes. The remainders of Nicole joined with an incredible extratropical tornado to create solid breezes over the Maritimes. Winds blasted to tropical storm drive on western Cape Breton, with the most grounded blasts achieving 80â mph (130â km/h). The solid breezes evacuated trees and brought down electrical cables and joined with unpleasant oceans to make undoings for ship intersections and confined access the Confederation Bridge. The tempest complex likewise dropped over 2â inches (60â mm) of precipitation, causing flooding in eastern Nova Scotia. The tempest's section amid the center of apple gather caused inconveniences for Annapolis Valley. 

The remainders of Nicole joined with an extratropical framework to create solid breezes in New England, with whirlwinds to 65â mph (105â km/h). In Maine, the breezes snapped diverges trees, and furthermore brought down trees and electrical cables. Power blackouts were accounted for, principally in beach front segments of Washington and Hancock Counties. Nicole created moderate swells along the East Coast of the United States. Conditions for surfing were best in New York and Rhode Island, where swells of over 4â feet (1.2â m) happened. Eleven boats announced typhoon compel twists in relationship with Subtropical Storm Nicole. The most extreme recorded breeze was 50â mph (80â km/h) while the tempest was at pinnacle force, while the base recorded weight was 995 mbar as Nicole was being consumed by the extratropical storm. 

Since 2002, subtropical tempests have been relegated names from the foreordained rundown of names utilized for tropical violent winds. Nicole was the first named subtropical tempest since the arrangement change that did not turn into a completely tropical violent wind. Typhoon Gustav in 2002 framed as and was named as a subtropical tornado, in spite of the fact that it later turned into a completely tropical violent wind and later reinforced into a sea tempest. In 1972 and 1973, four subtropical tempests were named utilizing the Phonetic letters in order. All other subtropical violent winds stayed anonymous.