Bud Billiken Parade and Picnic 

The Bud Billiken Parade and Picnic (otherwise called The Bud Billiken Day Parade) is a yearly procession held since 1929 in Chicago, Illinois,the United States of America; the Bud Billiken Day Parade is the biggest African-American motorcade in the United States of America. Held every year on the second Saturday in August, The motorcade course goes through the Bronzeville and Washington Park neighborhoods on the city's south side. Robert S. Abbott, the originator and distributer of the "Chicago Defender," made the anecdotal character of Bud Billiken, which he included in as youth exhortation section in his paper. David Kellum, prime supporter of the Bud Billiken Club and long-term march organizer recommended the procession as a festival of African-American life. Since its starting, the motorcade has highlighted big names, government officials, specialists, metro associations and youth. It is viewed as the second biggest procession in the United States, whose attention is on praising youth, training and African-American life. The motorcade is additionally refered to as the "class kickoff" festivity, denoting the finish of summer get-away and continuing of school for Chicago's childhood. 

Bud Billiken is an anecdotal character made in 1923 by Abbott, who had been thinking about adding an adolescent area to the "Chicago Defender" paper. While feasting at a Chinese eatery he saw a Billiken. A portion of the early Billiken segments were composed by Willard Motley, who later turned into a noticeable writer. Amid the mid 1930s, names of universal youth were recorded in the "Bud Billiken" segment of the paper each week. Between 1930–34, around 10,000 names showed up and were documented in the Carter G. Woodson Regional Library of the Chicago Public Library. 

Amid the Great Depression, Abbott included the Bud Billiken character in his paper as an image of pride, joy and trust in dark occupants. The character picked up noticeable quality in a funny cartoon and the "Chicago Defender" paper. In spite of the fact that the character was made in 1923, the motorcade did not start until 1929, when David Kellum started it as a festival of the "solidarity in decent variety for the offspring of Chicago". It has since developed to turned into a privately broadcast occasion and the second biggest motorcade in the country. 

The procession, which started on August 11, 1929, presently incorporates lawmakers, lovely ladies, superstars, melodic entertainers, and many walking, tumbling and moving gatherings. It has developed from a privately supported occasion to one with major corporate nearness and is viewed as a flag of the looming end of summer and start of the new school year. All things considered the motorcade supports fund-raise for school grants for neighborhood youth. The motorcade course has changed throughout the years. The first course was along Michigan Avenue starting at 31st Street, at that point moved east toward Washington Park. Objections for north-south traffic stream caused rerouting the motorcade course to South Parkway (presently named Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive), which runs straightforwardly into the recreation center. At different occasions, road fixes have required utilization of the Michigan course, yet the present course is currently the King Drive course. Freeman Gosden and Charles Correll of "Amos 'n' Andy" were the main visitors in the principal march. Robert S. Abbott drove the principal march in his Rolls Royce. Dr. Marjorie Stewart Joyner, leader of the Chicago Defender Charities, Inc., sorted out the motorcade for more than 50 years. Various prominent superstars and dignitaries have gone to the motorcade throughout the years, including U.S. President Harry S. Truman, Michael Jordan, Joe Louis, Muhammad Ali, Duke Ellington, Adelaide Hall, Oprah Winfrey, Diana Ross, Lena Horne, Ethel Waters, Cab Calloway, Paul Robeson, Chaka Khan and Billie Holiday. Truman rode close by John H. Sengstacke, who was Abbott's nephew and assumed control over the "Chicago Defender" in 1948, and Mayor Richard J. Daley in the 1956 Parade. Late motorcades have included well known melodic goes about as show entertainers at the post-march cookout. In 2006, roughly 26 million individuals saw the motorcade, including 25 million audience members and 1.2 million participants. The 2006 motorcade included 74,000 members and 160 buoys and vehicles. The 2008 motorcade was devoted to performer and comic Bernie Mac (star of "The Bernie Mac Show") and a local of Chicago; he passed on an hour prior to the beginning of the procession. In 1993, a solicitation by a dark LGBT gathering to take an interest in the procession was declined by the coordinators. Following lawful activity and the inclusion of Lambda Legal, the Ad Hoc Committee of Proud Black Lesbians and Gays was permitted to take an interest in the motorcade the next year. 

The motorcade has been broadcast for more than 35 years, start in 1978 on WGN-TV; which communicate the procession until 2012. WCIU-TV canvassed the procession starting in 2012 after it was dropped from WGN-TV however later dropped it in 2014. WLS-TV has been communicating the procession since 1984. The 89th Annual Parade occurred on August 11, 2018. Wager and Centric debuted the motorcade on their systems in 2012. 

The Chicago Defender Charities experienced a noteworthy rebuilding in 2017. Myiti Sengstacke–Rice is Board President of the Chicago Defender Charities and Bud Billiken Parade Chair. Sengstacke–Rice is the incredible grandniece of Robert Sengstacke Abbott, granddaughter of John Herman Henry Sengstacke, author of the Chicago Defender Charities and little girl of the late acclaimed photojournalist, Robert Abbott Sengstacke. 

The procession has arranged challenges for members, for example, best buoy, and best walking band. It happens in Chicago's Bronzeville neighborhood, beginning at 35th Street 

Bud Billiken Parade is themed each year by the procession board of trustees. The convention started in 1940 when the procession coordinators themed the motorcade "Nationalism" to show energy in the US inside the African-American people group. Different subjects throughout the years: 

A remarkable individual or people are welcomed every year to fill in as Grand Marshal, frequently including lawmakers, performers, or performers. Chicago local Chance the Rapper filled in as the Grand Marshal for the 88th yearly procession in 2017. Chicago local and vocalist Chaka Khan filled in as the Grand Marshal at the 2014 procession. Rapper T.I. filled in as Grand Marshal for the 83rd yearly procession in 2012. 

At the 78th yearly motorcade in 2007, then–U.S. Representative Barack Obama filled in as the Grand Marshal for the second year straight. Chicago Mayor Richard M. Daley visited, and walk members included U.S. Congressperson Dick Durbin, Lieutenant Governor of Illinois Pat Quinn and the Rev. Al Sharpton. One buoy spoke to the Chicago 2016 Committee and included past Chicago Olympians Bob Pickens, Willie May, Diane Simpson-Bundy and Kenny Johnson just as the child of Danell Nicholson. The Chicago Bulls' mascot showed up. 

The procession starts at 10 A.M. After the procession, guests are invited to remain in Washington Park for the "after-march exercises". The "after-march exercises" has different celebrations and seller stalls. The post–parade celebrations regularly incorporate a show. The 2006 procession included Yung Joc, and the 2007 motorcade highlighted Pretty Ricky. Be that as it may, it appears to be not one or the other "after-march exercises" incorporated a show. 

The 2003 procession included B2K. The show was free with for all intents and purposes boundless space in the recreation center for survey. Nonetheless, the group turned out to be boisterous making the show be abridged. More than 40 participants were taken to emergency clinics because of wounds in the savagery, including two adolescents who were shot.