Brilliant Gate Highlands National Park 

Brilliant Gate Highlands National Park is situated in Free State, South Africa, close to the Lesotho outskirt. It covers a region of . The recreation center's most striking highlights are its brilliant, ochre, and orange-shaded, profoundly dissolved sandstone bluffs and outcrops, particularly the Brandwag shake. Another component of the territory is the various surrenders and safe houses showing San shake artworks. Natural life highlighted at the recreation center incorporates mongooses, eland, zebras, and more than 100 fowl species. It is the Free State's solitary national park, and is progressively acclaimed for the magnificence of its scene than for its untamed life. Various fossil science finds have been made in the recreation center, including dinosaur eggs and skeletons. 

"Brilliant Gate" alludes to the sandstone precipices found on either side of the valley at the Golden Gate dam. In 1875, a rancher called J.N.R. van Reenen and his significant other ceased here as they headed out to their new ranch in Vuurland. He named the area "Brilliant Gate" when he saw the last beams of the setting sun fall on the precipices. 

In 1963, were announced as a national park, explicitly to safeguard the beautiful magnificence of the territory. In 1981, the recreation center was developed to , and in 1988, it was augmented to . In 2004, the recreation center was declared to unite with the neighboring QwaQwa National Park. The amalgamation of QwaQwa National Park was finished in 2007, expanding the recreation center's zone to . 

The recreation center is from Johannesburg and is near the towns of Clarens and Kestell, in the upper areas of the Little Caledon River. The recreation center is arranged in the Rooiberge of the eastern Free State, in the lower regions of the Maluti Mountains. The Caledon River shapes the southern limit of the recreation center, just as the fringe between the Free State and Lesotho. The most noteworthy top in the recreation center (and furthermore in the Free State) is Ribbokkop at above ocean level. 

The recreation center is situated in the eastern highveld locale of South Africa, and encounters a dry, radiant atmosphere from June to August. It has showers, hail, and tempests among October and April. It has thick snowfalls in the winter. The recreation center has a generally high precipitation of every year. 

The recreation center is a territory of rich highveld and montane prairie greenery. It has in excess of 60 grass species and a substantial assortment of knobs and herbs. Every one of these animal groups has its very own blossoming time, implying that veld blooms can be seen all through the mid year. The recreation center likewise has Afromontane woods and high-height Austro-Afro elevated meadow, which is rare in South Africa. The ouhout ("Leucosidea sericea"), an evergreen species, is the most widely recognized tree in the recreation center. Ouhout is a most loved natural surroundings of creepy crawlies and 117 species happen on these trees in the recreation center. The Lombardi poplars and sobbing willows in the recreation center are presented species, however are kept on account of their social and memorable association with the eastern Free State. Other colorful species in the recreation center, for instance wattle and bluegum, are deliberately annihilated. 

Rather than reintroducing one of the "enormous five" into the recreation center, the sungazer reptile and water mongoose were reintroduced. Twelve types of mice, 10 types of carnivores, and 10 pronghorn species have been recorded in the recreation center. The dark rhebuck and the mountain reedbuck were available when the recreation center was built up. 

More than 210 winged creature species have been seen in the recreation center, including the uncommon whiskery vulture and the imperiled Cape vulture and uncovered ibis. 

Seven snake species, including the puff viper, mountain viper, and rinkhals, are found in the recreation center. 

The topography of the recreation center gives visual "reading material" instances of Southern Africa's geographical history. The sandstone arrangements in the recreation center structure the upper piece of the Karoo Supergroup. These developments were stored amid a time of aeolian statement towards the finish of the Triassic Period. At the season of statement, the atmosphere of the zone the recreation center spreads was ending up dynamically drier until parched desert conditions set in, bringing about a place where there is rises and sandy desert, with intermittent dispersed desert gardens. The testimony of the sandstones finished when magma streamed out over the desert 190 million years back. 

The accompanying succession of topographical developments is obvious in the recreation center (beginning from the base): the Molteno Formation, Elliott Formation, Clarens Formation, and Drakensberg Formation. The yellow-darker Golden Gate and Brandwag precipices are comprised of the Clarens arrangement. The layers in this arrangement are thick. The Drakensberg development contains the basaltic magma that streamed over the desert. It shapes the mountain summits in the recreation center. On Ribbokkop, it is thick. The Elliot Formation is a red mudstone where numerous dinosaur fossils have been found. 

The most established dinosaur developing lives at any point found were found in the recreation center in 1978. The eggs were from the Triassic Period (220 to 195 million years prior) and had fossilized fetal skeletons of "Massospondylus", a prosauropod dinosaur. More instances of these eggs have since been found in the recreation center. Different fossils found in the recreation center incorporate those of cutting edge cynodontia (canine toothed creatures), little thecodontia (creatures with teeth set immovably in the jaw), and fledgling like and crocodile-like dinosaurs. 

Settlement in the recreation center is accessible at Glen Reenen and Brandwag Rest camps. Troop and campgrounds with all pleasantries are accessible at Glen Reenen camp. The lodging was once part of Brandwag camp, however since its ongoing renovation, it is overseen independently by SANParks as Golden Gate Hotel. The closest town to Golden Gate Highlands National Park is Clarens (17â km toward the west), however Phuthaditjhaba is additionally effectively come to by a decent tar street, driving through the entrance door toward the east of the recreation center. 

This park will be incorporated into the Maloti-Drakensberg Transfrontier Conservation Area, Peace Park.