WhiteWater World 

WhiteWater World is a water park arranged in the suburb of Coomera on the Gold Coast, Australia. It is claimed and worked by Ardent Leisure. 

Following quite a while of arranging and a time of development, WhiteWater World opened to the general population on 8 December 2006. The ten Australian shoreline culture themed attractions cost roughly A$56â million. These incorporated The Green Room, Super Tubes Hydrocoaster, The Rip, The BRO, Temple of Huey, Cave of Waves, Wiggle Bay, and Pipeline Plunge. From that point forward, four extra water slides: two called Little Rippers, one called The Wedgie and one called the Triple Vortex, have been included. 

WhiteWater World was intended to be extremely productive in its water use. Since opening, the amount of guests has reliably been above desires. Passionate Leisure has presented an improvement application for the development of the water park and plans to include five new attractions. 

In 2004, Macquarie Leisure started arranging a water park to be situated alongside the organization's current Dreamworld amusement park. Dreamworld's Chief Executive Officer Stephen Gregg and General Manager of Special Projects Bob Tan visited water stops far and wide to find the most exciting and front line water rides accessible. Later Tan was cited saying "...the planning phase for the new park was an eatery napkin in a little bistro in the US". 

On 28 November 2005, Macquarie Leisure declared it would contribute $56 million on the Dreamworld Water Park venture, with development starting presently. 

The current Dreamworld vehicle leave was updated to suit more autos and the expansion of a water leave in the southern segment. Development of the water park started in January 2006. In June, two of the three slide towers were finished, with a few slides in the early periods of development. After one month, a few attractions were reported by the recreation center with others being estimated upon. A few attractions were nearing fulfillment in September and all the arranged attractions had been uncovered by October. 

WhiteWater World opened three weeks in front of timetable on 8 December 2006 following seven days of reviews. The recreation center opened with ten attractions, including The Green Room, The Rip, Super Tubes Hydrocoaster, The BRO, The Temple of Huey (3 singular slides), Pipeline Plunge, Wiggle Bay and the Cave of Waves. Right now, the recreation center highlighted numerous Australian and world firsts: The Rip and Super Tubes Hydrocoaster were both Australian firsts; The BRO was a world first; and The Green Room was Australia's greatest Tornado slide. Following a half year of activity Macquarie Leisure declared that WhiteWater World pulled in 247,360 guests, creating an income of $8.7â million and a benefit of $4â million. 

WhiteWater World performed above desires in the wake of opening with around 23,000 visitors between 8 December and 31 December 2006. WhiteWater World kept on surpassing Macquarie Leisure's desires amid its first year of operation.<ref name="Results - First 3/4"></ref><ref name="Results - First 3/4 Parkz"></ref> The principal year saw 493,227 visitors, surpassing the 450,000 gauge, gaining the recreation center over $8.4â million in income. The recreation center kept on performing admirably in ensuing years with a 18.4% expansion in participation in 2008. 

In June 2009, Macquarie Leisure was renamed to Ardent Leisure as a major aspect of a corporate repositioning which saw the organization split from Macquarie. In August 2010, Ardent Leisure reported a decrease in income and benefits in its amusement park division. It expressed that a capital consumption plan had been supported which would "...strengthen ride stock and shopper advance". 

WhiteWaterWorld is at present positioned as one of the world's most water effective parks due to its economical water the board and ecologically cordial innovation. 

In September 2007, the recreation center included two attractions: a couple of ProSlide Cannon Bowls called The Little Rippers and an occasions setting called The Shell. After a month, WhiteWater World presented an improvement application to the Gold Coast City Council to expand the water park. The fundamental element of the application was a pinnacle highlighting three new water slides: two Mammoth slides and a Tornado Tantrum Alley. The extension proposition additionally highlighted a lethargic stream and a substantial water play territory. Following two years, the application was affirmed by the chamber. The extension plans have been postponed due to the 2007-2010 budgetary emergency. 

In December 2009, it was accounted for that WhiteWater World wanted to include a WhiteWater West AquaLoop. Anyway Village Roadshow Theme Parks, proprietor of contender Wet'n'Wild Gold Coast, endeavored to arrange a selectiveness concurrence with the maker. A quarter of a year later in February 2010, it was declared that WhiteWater World would fabricate an elective fascination worked by ProSlide before the April school occasions. The Wedgie, the first ProSlide Superloop, opened on 1 April 2011. It was the principal ride in Australia to highlight a device entryway discharge and was promoted as Australia's first circling water slide. 

In 2011, WhiteWater World's agreement with Nickelodeon was ended and Nickelodeon's Pipeline Plunge was renamed Pipeline Plunge. 

In September 2014, the recreation center included 'Triple Vortex', a two-man tube slide by ProSlide. 

WhiteWater World highlights a few water slide attractions (all worked by ProSlide), a vast wave pool and separate youngsters and little child territories. There are sustenance and drink outlets, retail locations, a surf school, a capacity territory and various shaded regions with seating. The recreation center highlights three water slide towers, each including a gathering of slides assembled by the dimension of rush. The recreation center likewise includes three family-arranged water attractions separate from the towers. The majority of the recreation center's attractions have an Australian shoreline culture topic. 

The slide tower close to the passageway contains the recreation center's fundamental rush slides. The Wedgie is a body slide highlighting a device entryway discharge into a close vertical drop. Riders at that point enter a quick, descending spiraling turn and achieve velocities of almost before they are hindered in a run-out chute. The ride was the first ProSlide SuperLOOP on the planet. The Green Room comprises of four individuals boarding a cloverleaf-molded cylinder in which they navigate a long passage pursued by a drop into a pipe. Inside the channel, riders waver forward and backward up the dividers along the edge and drop into a sprinkle pool. From its opening to 2015, The Green Room has been Australia's biggest ProSlide Tornado beating Wet'n'Wild Water World's Tornado in stature and passage length. On the Super Tubes Hydrocoaster, three individuals sit on a pontoon, whose weight is for the most part inferable from an expansive magnet on its underside. Riders experience a few soak drops pursued by magnet-controlled slopes, finishing with a splashdown in a little pool. The Super Tubes Hydrocoaster was the second ProSlide Hydro Magnetic Rocket Slide on the planet and keeps on being Australia's solitary water liner. 

The second slide tower, along the recreation center's southern outskirt, highlights two rides with progressively moderate rush evaluations. On The Rip, riders jump into a four-man, cloverleaf-molded cylinder. They plunge a dull passage before entering a huge, open bowl. The pontoon circles the focal point of the bowl at that point exits down through the inside and into a splashdown pool. The Rip is the first and as of now the main ProSlide Behemoth Bowl in Australia. The BRO (Blue Ringed Octopus) is a water slide comprising of eight long paths. From a stature of , riders mount an individual tangle and slide head initially down an encased winding passage before converging into open, parallel paths to the completion. In 24 seconds, riders can achieve paces of up to . The BRO has a limit of 1000 riders for each hour. At the point when The BRO opened in 2006, it was the biggest ProSlide Octopus Racer on the planet and is the just a solitary one in Australia. A third slide, Triple Vortex, was added to the pinnacle in late 2014. Sets of riders will slide down an encased cylinder slide with three pipes, like smaller than expected forms of the recreation center's Green Room channel. 

The slide tower in the southeast corner of the recreation center contains five slides intended for the individuals who want a gentle rush. A portion of the slides on this pinnacle collaborate with Dreamworld's Cyclone crazy ride. The Little Rippers are two ProSlide dueling gun bowl slides. The slides can oblige visitors riding in it is possible that a couple of individual cylinders. Riders start in one of two parallel chutes before entering burrows and separating from in inverse ways. Each passage has a lofty drop into the bowl component of the ride, after which the pontoon drops down through the inside and into a run-out chute. The other three slides on this pinnacle are all in all known as The Temple of Huey. Visitors can ride in a solitary or twofold cylinder. Each of the three slides are ProSlide Pipelines. The three slides are separately named Broken Headz, Cut Snake and Screamin Right Handers and are long individually. Broken Headz and Cut Snake are encased and Screamin Right Handers is an open flume. 

Three family-arranged attractions are situated on the ground level, withdrew from the three slide towers. Two of these are youngsters' regions and the third is a wave pool. Pipeline Plunge is a youngsters' region with four flume slides and several water exercises. The zone, initially called Nickelodeon's Pipeline Plunge, is an extensive, staggered water play structure including a tipping pail which dumps water on visitors like clockwork. It played host to two "Ooze Fest" occasions in 2009 that incorporated a few live shows, a dunking seat and "Australia's greatest smearing" where of ooze was dumped on park visitors utilizing green hued water in the goliath tipping pail twice day by day. The mass smearing returned in the 2010/2011 summer occasions as a component of the Summer Funomenon. Pipeline Plunge is a WhiteWater West Aqua Play zone. Squirm Bay is a Wiggles themed little child territory including melodic and intuitive water play exercises, a shallow pool and four Wiggles-shaded water slides, situated at the back of the zone. these were produced by ProSlide. The intelligent highlights are made by WaterPlay. The Cave of Waves is a themed wave pool which can create rushes of up to high. Worked by Murphy's Waves of Scotland, the pool has a steady temperature of 26 degrees Celsius. The Get Wet Surf School utilizes the pool for its exercises outside of typical park working hours. 

Notwithstanding its lineup of attractions, WhiteWater World likewise has a retail outlet, an occasions scene, cabanas, and a few sustenance and drink outlets. 

The Beyond the Beach shop, situated close to the recreation center's passage, sells surf and WhiteWater World marked product. The shop contains a Kodak photograph focus that enables visitors to buy on-ride photographs taken on the Super Tubes Hydrocoaster and photos taken inside the recreation center. Past the Beach additionally fills in as the leave doors for the recreation center. 

WhiteWater World works three feasting outlets in the pinnacle special seasons: Bite Me Cafe, Sandman's Cafe and Bar and Salty's Kiosk. The most stretched out scope of dinners is accessible from the Bite Me Cafe which works lasting through the year. Sandman's Cafe and Bar is an authorized bar where visitors can buy mixed beverages and nourishment choices including Eagle Boys pizza. It is situated on the recreation center's western outskirt between the Cave of Waves and the splashdown of The Wedgie. Salty's Kiosk is situated by The BRO and sells slushies, frozen yogurts and other nibble sustenances. 

Since September 2007, WhiteWater World has facilitated a covert occasions scene, the biggest at an Australian amusement park, The Shell. The setting can provide food for up to 2000 visitors and is situated on the southeast corner of WhiteWater World. 

From April 2011, WhiteWater World has offered visitors the contract of 12 extravagance cabanas, situated around the recreation center. Every cabana is intended for up to four visitors, who approach deck seats, lounge chairs, a foot stool, an iPod dock, towels and a small icebox. 

Before opening, WhiteWater World was scrutinized for being worked amid one of Australia's most exceedingly bad dry spells and in a zone on Level 5 water limitations. When planning WhiteWater World, Macquarie Leisure actualized measures to guarantee that the recreation center was a standout amongst the most water effective water stops on the planet through the minimisation of water misfortune. 

In October 2008, staff at WhiteWater World ceased Paralympian Steve Simmonds from riding the slides. Simmonds was irate and expressed that he had an inclination that he was oppressed. WhiteWater World refered to maker rules and wellbeing worries as the explanations for the confinements. 

Amid the main entire year of activity, WhiteWater World pulled in a larger number of guests than the normal 450,000 visitors. Participation records show near 500,000 visitors went to the recreation center amid that period. 

In an audit of a few Australian excitement attractions for "The Australian", Scott Podmore appraised WhiteWater World 7.5 out of 10, outranking its primary rivals Wet'n'Wild Gold Coast and Sea World likewise on the Gold Coast and UnderWater World on the Sunshine Coast. Podmore expressed that "WhiteWater World is a superb, different park offering something for everybody." and that "WhiteWater World is phenomenal for a sprinkle, some R&R or some tricky enormous rides". Podmore featured The Rip, The BRO, Little Rippers and Temple of Huey as the recreation center's top attractions. 

Before The Wedgie opened in April 2010, a few media journalists encountered the ride. Tanya Westthorp of the "Gold Coast Bulletin" depicted the ride as "...not for the timid". She likewise expressed that "...disorientation wins for a huge piece of the ride, yet the rush is unparalleled to some other waterslide". Phil Lutton of the "Brisbane Times" composed that the ride "...is not just the quickest, most elating water ride I've at any point attempted however it satisfies its name in spades".