The Sound of Girls Aloud: The Greatest Hits 

The Sound of Girls Aloud: The Greatest Hits is the main most noteworthy hits collection of English-Irish young lady bunch Girls Aloud. It was first discharged in the United Kingdom through a constrained version on 23 October 2006, while the standard form was discharged on 30 October 2006. "The Sound of Girls Aloud" highlights twelve of the gathering's singles, two of which achieved number one in the UK. The collection highlights three new tracks, with "Something Kinda Ooooh" and "I Think We're Alone Now" being discharged as singles and cresting inside the main five on the UK Singles Chart. 

"The Sound of Girls Aloud" got positive surveys from commentators, who applauded it as an impression of the gathering's prosperity. The collection entered the UK Albums Chart at number one, making it Girls Aloud's first collection to do as such. It additionally topped at number nine on the Irish Albums Chart. In 2009, the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry (IFPI) perceived "The Sound of Girls Aloud" as one of the nine collections that year to sell no less than 1 million units in Europe. 

On 6 October 2006, Girls Aloud reported that they would discharge their first gathering collection, following bits of gossip that they would part after "Science" (2005). A constrained version of "The Sound of Girls Aloud" was discharged in the United Kingdom on 23 October. The constrained release incorporated a reward plate with exchange alters of the gathering's past singles "No Good Advice" and "Wake Me Up", and unreleased tracks, including a front of "Sacrosanct Trust", initially recorded by individual "" challengers One True Voice. The reward circle was likewise going to incorporate a front of Chris Isaak's "Devilish Game", in any case, the track did not make onto the last track posting. 

The standard form of the gathering collection was discharged the next week, on 30 October. The customary track posting incorporates three new tracks: "Something Kinda Ooooh", "Cash" and a front of Tommy James and the Shondells' 1967 single "I Think We're Alone Now". Initially, a front of "What A Feeling" from the film "Flashdance" was incorporated on the track list rather than "I Think We're Alone Now", yet Girls Aloud reached the record name three days before the collection was fabricated to state they would prefer to record the Tommy James and the Shondells tune. The gathering recorded the tune the next morning and the collection was aced three days after the fact. Aside from the new tracks, the collection contains twelve of the gathering's past singles, two of which achieved number one in the UK: "Sound of the Underground" and "I'll Stand by You". 

As indicated by Irish bandmate Nadine Coyle, the main draft of the fine art included just the Union Jack, however she requested the expansion of the banner of Ireland. Be that as it may, the banner shows up topsy turvy on the spread, taking after the banner of Ivory Coast. 

"The Sound of Girls Aloud" got positive audits from faultfinders. Talia Kraines of BBC Music called the collection "a voyage through the most energizing and brave popular music of ongoing occasions" and proceeded to include that "this reality band has outperformed all desires," while Paul Scott of "Stylus Magazine" depicted it as "a contemptuous gathering through the last 30 odd long stretches of pop, taking motivation from the most startling of spots" and hailed Girls Aloud as "the best singles band Britain [sic] has created this decade." Allmusic analyst Andy Kellman noticed the collection for making "a perfect presentation" to the gathering, and said that the three new melodies would undoubtedly "keep the gathering's noteworthy dash of predominance above water." Dan Cairns of "The Times" gave the collection 4 out of 5 stars, expressing that Girls Aloud's identity streams "through irreproachable, sugar-surge pop singles, for example, "Something Kinda Ooooh", "The Show" and "Sound of the Underground". 

Pitchfork Media commentator Tim Finney depicted the collection as "a hurricane trip through strange yet adorable pop gadgetry that may leave the uninitiated reeling." He complimented the melodies' "deathless snares and multi-kind fireworks" and noticed that they are assorted, changing from various classifications while grasping "components of electroclash, huge beat, and even skiffle." Leonie Cooper of "The Guardian" portrayed the collection as "smooth ... close perfect high-octane pop the whole distance"; in any case, she felt that the melodies were not by any means important, as "Young ladies Aloud solid unmistakably additionally energizing when they're basically having a ton of fun". In 2007, "The Guardian" incorporated the best hits accumulation in their rundown of "1000 collections to hear before you pass on". Dorian Lynskey stated, "Years from now, when somebody needs to know how strong and splendid standard British pop could get in the noughties, play them this." 

"The Sound of Girls Aloud" moved toward becoming Girls Aloud's first collection to make a big appearance at number one in the United Kingdom, and remained on the UK Albums Chart for an aggregate of 38 weeks. On 24 November 2007, Mark Sutherland of "Announcement" revealed that the collection had officially sold an aggregate of 767,000 units in the nation. On the week finishing 2 November 2006, the collection appeared at number 13 on the Irish Albums Chart, ascending to another pinnacle of number nine the next week. It was affirmed Platinum by the Irish Recorded Music Association, meaning shipments of 15,000 units in the nation alone. On 29 January 2009, the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry (IFPI) perceived "The Sound of Girls Aloud" as one of the nine collections that year to sell somewhere around 1 million units in Europe. Starting at 21 March 2013, the collection has sold more than 1,2 million units in Europe. 

"Something Kinda Ooooh" was discharged on 16 October 2006 as the lead single from "The Sound of Girls Aloud", multi week before the collection's discharge. The track appeared at number five on the UK Singles Chart on download deals alone, before achieving its pinnacle position at number three on the week finishing 4 November 2006. The going with music video was coordinated by Stuart Gosling and created by Jon Adams, and highlights the gathering "singing and moving charmingly". "I Think We're Alone Now" was picked as the second and last single from the collection, being discharged on 18 December. The tune topped at number four on the UK Singles Chart amid Christmas week. The music video was coordinated by Alex Hemming and Nick Collett, and depicts Girls Aloud trying to victimize a Las Vegas club. 

In 2007, Girls Aloud went on a visit to additionally advance the collection. The declaration of the visit and the chronicle of their fourth studio collection halted bits of gossip that the band were part up, which had surfaced because of the arrival of their most noteworthy hits collection. The show got blended surveys from music commentators, with Dave Simpson of "The Guardian" saying that the gathering "toll best when they are playing their very own tunes," while a pundit for "Every day Mail" esteemed it the gathering's "raunchiest visit ever [...] there was singing and moving, yet the emerge component of Girls Aloud's most recent visit: sex claim a-go-go." 

All tracks were delivered by Xenomania. Credits adjusted from the liner notes of "The Sound of Girls Aloud: The Greatest Hits". 

Credits adjusted from Allmusic.