Cumberland station (CTA) 

Cumberland is a station on the Chicago Transit Authority's 'L' framework. It is arranged on the Blue Line among Rosemont and Harlem. The station is situated in the middle of the Kennedy Expressway at Cumberland Avenue in the O'Hare neighborhood on Chicago's Northwest Side, and it is in nearness to both the Norwood Park neighborhood and the city of Park Ridge. The region encompassing the station comprises of blended business and private advancement. 

The Cumberland station was first proposed in 1972 as a feature of an expansion of the Blue Line from Logan Square to O'Hare International Airport. The station opened on February 27, 1983, alongside Harlem and Rosemont. The three new stations conveyed 6,000 new riders toward the northwest CTA line in the next month, and Cumberland turned out to be particularly alluring to rural workers. The station at Cumberland comprises of a solitary island stage; a passerby bridge associates the stage to a station working toward the south and a leave stairway toward the north. The station additionally incorporates a transport terminal and a recreation center and ride parcel. Trains serve Cumberland 24 hours per day consistently; the progress between trains is 10 minutes amid pinnacle periods, with less incessant administration at different occasions. Notwithstanding trains, Cumberland likewise serves CTA transports, Pace transports, Burlington Trailways transports, and Greyhound transports. 

Cumberland is situated at the intersection of Cumberland Avenue and the Kennedy Expressway (I-90, exit 79). The station is situated in the O'Hare neighborhood of Chicago on the outskirt of the Norwood Park neighborhood. It is the nearest 'L' station to the city of Park Ridge, which fringes Chicago along Higgins Road north of the station. The zone encompassing the station comprises of a blend of arranged advancement, business, and local locations. Citicorp Plaza, a place of business which houses the central station of broadcast communications supplier U.S. Cell, is situated toward the south of Cumberland at 8410 W. Bryn Mawr. The Renaissance Chicago O'Hare Suites Hotel is additionally situated close to the station at 8500 W. Bryn Mawr. 

The expansion of the CTA line in the middle of the Kennedy Expressway from Jefferson Park to O'Hare Airport, which incorporated the development of the Cumberland station, was first proposed by Mayor Richard J. Daley in 1972 by the Chicago Public Works Commission. The expense of this venture was at first assessed at $80 million. The Chicago Plan Commission endorsed the undertaking on August 8, 1974; by this point, the assessed expense of the venture had ascended to $174 million. The government endorsed the undertaking and consented to give 80 percent of the assets for its development in 1978, and development on the augmentation started in March 1980. The augmentation was initially intended to open in 1982; be that as it may, its opening was deferred after a progression of occurrences including two strikes by specialists hanging in the balance. The area of the augmentation from Jefferson Park to River Road, including Cumberland, opened on February 27, 1983; the CTA ran free transport prepares between the new stations at River Road, and Harlem, the day preceding their opening so riders could "get to know" the new line. The last expense of the augmentation was $198.9 million, with the Cumberland station costing roughly $10 million. 

In the month following the opening of the three new stations 6,000 extra suburbanites utilized the northwest administration. The Cumberland station turned out to be especially appealing to rural workers from Des Plaines and Park Ridge; an investigation dispatched soon after the station's opening found that just 12.4% of suburbanites stopping in the Cumberland and Rosemont stations were Chicagoans. The convergence of rural workers to the new Blue Line stops prompted a fall in ridership on the Chicago and Northwestern's Northwest Line, which generally served the northwest rural areas close to the new stops. 

The Cumberland station was structured by Wojciech M. Madeyski of the design firm Perkins and Will. Cumberland's island stage is situated in the middle of the Kennedy Expressway toward the west of Cumberland Avenue. It serves the Blue Line's two tracks; the northern track serves trains to O'Hare, while the southern track serves trains to Forest Park. Electronic signs on the stage offer constant data about train entries and administration cautions; Cumberland is one of four 'L' stations with these signs, which were introduced in 2002 as a component of a test case program. A person on foot bridge associates the stage to doorways on the north and south sides of the turnpike. The north side of the bridge prompts a leave stairway, while the south side prompts the fundamental station building. The station building houses an open workmanship design, "Shake Bow" by Charles Ross; the model comprises of a high metal-cased crystal set in a limestone base. Cumberland's transport terminal and park and ride parcel are likewise found south of the stage. The recreation center and ride part has 1633 spaces and is worked by CPS Parking; the parcel initially had 706 spaces and extended to its present limit in 1992. The offices at Cumberland are impaired available. 

Cumberland is a piece of the CTA's Blue Line, which keeps running from O'Hare Airport to downtown Chicago and Forest Park. It is the third inbound station from O'Hare on the Blue Line and is arranged between the Rosemont and Harlem stations. Blue Line trains serve Cumberland 24 hours per day consistently; trains work generally every 7 to 10 minutes amid surge hour and late morning task, with longer types of progress of as long as 30 minutes during the evening. The station is roughly a short ways from O'Hare, a little ways from Clark/Lake on the up and up, and a short ways from Forest Park. 1,304,280 travelers boarded at Cumberland in 2011. 

Cumberland benefits a few transport courses notwithstanding 'L' trains. One CTA transport course end at the station, the 81W West Lawrence; this course gives administration to Cumberland Avenue, Lawrence Avenue, East River Road, and the Jefferson Park Transit Center. Four Pace transport courses likewise end at Cumberland: the 240 Dee Road, the 241 Greenwood-Talcott, the 290 Touhy Avenue, and the 331 Cumberland-fifth Avenue. These courses associate with the Golf Mill Shopping Center, the Howard 'L' station, and the networks of Park Ridge, Niles and Brookfield. Intercity transport courses worked by Greyhound and by Burlington Trailways additionally make stops at this station.