The Cost of Living (Lost) 

"The Cost of Living" is the fifth scene of the third period of "Lost", and the 54th scene in general. It publicized on November 1, 2006, in the US, averaging 16.07 million watchers, and on December 5, 2006, in the UK, being viewed by 1.15 million watchers. The scene was composed by Monica Owusu-Breen and Alison Schapker and coordinated by Jack Bender. The plot focuses on the character of Mr. Eko (Adewale Akinnuoye-Agbaje), who in flashbacks demonstrates how he turned into a minister supplanting his dead sibling Yemi (Adetokumboh M'Cormack), and in the present day occasions is spooky by dreams of Yemi while different castaways choose to visit a Dharma Initiative station. 

The scene was composed to complete Eko's character bend as Akinnuoye-Agbaje had mentioned to leave the show while completing the second season. Commentators consequently adulated "The Cost of Living" while at the same time thinking about that the takeoff of Eko made "Lost" lose a standout amongst its best characters. 

Soon after the demise of his sibling Yemi, Eko is driven back to Yemi's town. Inside the congregation, Eko reports to the church kid Daniel and his mom Amina that he will assume his sibling's position at the congregation. At the point when Amina likewise asks about Yemi's up and coming excursion to London, an astounded Eko states that he would likewise supplant him there. 

Some time later, after Eko has turned out to be built up in his new job as cleric, he is gone up against by minute men, who Amina uncovers that had an arrangement with Yemi to get the vast majority of the center's immunizations. Eko before long builds up an arrangement to sell the immunization on the underground market before he leaves the nation that coming end of the week. 

As the minute men learn of Eko's arrangement, they assault him inside the congregation, however end up getting killed. The townspeople react by shutting the congregation as they felt it was despoiled. Amina gets out Eko, saying she had known about the antibody bargain, and encourages him to apologize and come to terms with God, revealing to Eko that he "owes" Yemi one church. 

A ridiculous Eko has a dream of his sibling Yemi (Adetokumboh M'Cormack) holding a cigarette lighter, who says it was Eko's an ideal opportunity to admit his transgressions and, he realized where to discover him. A while later, Eko's safe house bursts into flames, and Eko is saved by Charlie Pace (Dominic Monaghan) and Hugo "Hurley" Reyes (Jorge Garcia). As John Locke (Terry O'Quinn) touches base to ask what occurred, Eko has disappeared. 

The following morning, Locke recommends to Desmond Hume (Henry Ian Cusick) that he visit the station. Joined by Charlie, Sayid Jarrah (Naveen Andrews), Nikki and Paulo (Kiele Sanchez and Rodrigo Santoro), the gathering discovers Eko on their way to the Pearl. Upon landing, Eko does not discover Yemi's body on the plane on the passage, and chooses to stay outside while Locke and the others enter the incubate. Inside the Pearl, Sayid tinkers first with the correspondence lines and, following a recommendation from Nikki, the screens. At that point one of the screens gets a live video feed of what seems, by all accounts, to be another bring forth, uncovering a man with an eyepatch (Andrew Divoff) who at that point kills the camera. 

In the mean time, outside the Pearl, Eko sees Yemi and tails him into an open field, where Yemi discloses to him it is the ideal opportunity for Eko to admit his transgressions. Eko says he has not trespassed, having not picked the existence he was given and that Eko had just done what he expected to do to endure. A furious looking Yemi answers, "You address me as though I were your sibling" as he withdraws into the wilderness. Eko tails him asking "Who are you?!", and after that finds the smoke beast. An arm of smoke assaults Eko, beating him into trees before he is pummeled into the ground. Locke and the others surge out of the station to discover a bloodied Eko. Locke approaches Eko, who murmurs his diminishing words into Locke's ears. Sayid asks what he stated, and Locke answers, "We're straightaway." 

At , Jack is welcomed by Ben Linus (Michael Emerson) to go to a dedication administration being held for Colleen. In transit, Jack gets some information about the indications of Ben's spinal tumor, especially bringing up that it will execute him. Ben purports not to comprehend what Jack is discussing. Secretly, Ben asks Juliet Burke (Elizabeth Mitchell) why she demonstrated his X-beams to Jack. Juliet answers that she never revealed to Jack whose X-beams they were, and comments that Ben must have coincidentally affirmed Jack's supposition. 

The next day, Ben discloses to Jack that they had an ideal intend to persuade Jack to work on Ben's spine, however it fizzled when Jack saw the X-beams. A short time later, Juliet conveys to Jack's cell a motion picture, which comprises of Juliet talking through sign cards. As Juliet examines how the medical procedure will continue, on the tape she discloses to Jack that Ben is a liar and risky, and in this manner the medical procedure ought to be deliberately bungled to slaughter Ben, and that she will ensure Jack on the off chance that he does as such. 

Adewale Akinnuoye-Agbaje marked to "Lost" on a one-year contract, as he would not like to make a long haul promise to the arrangement. As Michelle Rodriguez marked under comparative conditions that lead to her character Ana-Lucia Cortez just showing up in the show's second season, show sprinters Damon Lindelof and Carlton Cuse consulted with Akinnuoye-Agbaje to make his character, Mr. Eko, to show up in the third season also, including some space between the two character passings to build up Eko's conclusion better. As taping of season 2 finished, discussions between the on-screen character and the authors finished setting Eko's takeoff amid the initial six scenes, before mid-season break, with "a stunning and passionate demise". To ensure the succession was "huge and noteworthy", impacts chief Kevin Blank chose to set the passing at the Jackass Ginger in Kalihi, a huge space that permitted to make the Smoke Monster "flip him around in odd physical positions". A trick twofold was hauled through links, and alongside the advanced beast and wire expulsion, quick altering made the scene likened to "an entertainer's trap", as Blank would see it. The scene was composed by Monica Owusu-Breen and Alison Schapker, who had recently worked in another arrangement by "Lost" creation organization Bad Robot Productions, "Moniker". 

Cuse and Lindelof expressed that Nikki and Paulo filled in as a red herring as bits of gossip were raised of an approaching character passing, and the fanbase would anticipate that this should happen to the newcomers "who were kind of just there from the beginning" rather than an unmistakable and well known character as Eko. Juliet's message to Jack is a respect to Bob Dylan's video for "Underground Homesick Blues", where the performer flips prompt cards while taking a gander at the camera. 

This scene pulled in 16.07 million American watchers in its unique communicate on November 1, 2006, remaining as the tenth most watched program of the week. In the United Kingdom, the scene had 1.247 million watchers, positioning third in multichannel appears after "Portage Super Sunday" and "The Simpsons". In Canada, "The Cost of Living" had 1.15 million watchers, positioning as the 26th most noteworthy appraised program of the week. 

Audits were certain, however most faultfinders found that the character of Eko was murdered too early in the show. Composing for Zap2it, Rick Porter said that while "The Cost of Living" was the best scene of season 3 so far with "a lighting up flashback, some overwhelming island juju and a pleasant blend of the campers and the Others", the demise of Eko expelled from "Lost" "a standout amongst its most convincing characters and best performers, which only level out sucks." Kristin dos Santos of "E! On the web" called Mr. Eko "the best character of the show", and was along these lines baffled with his demise. Christine Fenno of "Amusement Weekly" expressed that she would miss Adewale Akinnuoye-Agbaje, and observed Juliet's message to be the best piece of the scene, that like the remainder of season three "addressed a couple of inquiries (whose tumor?), brought up a couple of issues (who's the eye-fix fellow?), and disregarded some long-standing inquiries (how did Yemi and Eko crash on the equivalent island?)." 

IGN's Chris Carabott positioned the scene 9.3 out of 10, saying it was "one of the arrangement's earnest attempts" investigating the arrangement's folklore and giving new ways, while likewise including Eko in "a standout amongst the most reviving flashbacks that the arrangement has delivered hitherto" and "a stunning encounter" with the Smoke Monster. The analyst still grumbled about Nikki and Paulo's investment, thinking of them as "ineffectively created" and giving "the feeling that they are being shoehorned in". The site later positioned "The Cost of Living" as the 25th best scene of the arrangement, saying that while early Season 3 "may have hauled a bit", "The Cost of Living" "saw the fervor and show increase impressively. The main thing defacing this generally incredible scene was the nearness of Nikki and Paolo." On the other hand, a comparative rundown by the "Los Angeles Times" positioned it 96th, taking into account that regardless of being "really an entirely decent bit of TV", the scene was "simply damaged by the way that the show was constrained into killing Mr. Eko, a character whose story was a long way from being done."