Jamaica at the 1988 Winter Olympics 

Jamaica contended in the Winter Olympic Games out of the blue at the 1988 Winter Olympics in Calgary, Alberta, Canada. They contended in one game, Bobsledding, in both the two-man and four-man occasions and completed outside the award puts in the two rivalries. Competitors were enrolled from the Jamaica Defense Force, which saw Dudley Stokes, Devon Harris and Michael White become the primary individuals from the group. Caswell Allen was the fourth man, however was harmed before the beginning of the Olympics and was supplanted by Chris Stokes, who was just in Canada to help his sibling and new colleague Dudley. 

The two-man occasion occurred first, with Dudley Stokes and White completing in 30th position by and large. American TV channels disclosed film of the four-man Jamaican group, and in spite of slamming amid the third run and completing keep going in general, proceeded to move the 1993 film "Cool Runnings". 

The Jamaica Olympic Association was framed in 1936, however because of the dropping of the 1940 and 1944 Olympics because of the Second World War, the principal Games they contended in was the 1948 Summer Olympics in London. They have showed up at each Summer Games since, including at the 1960 Games in which they showed up as a major aspect of the consolidated group of the British West Indies. They have won awards at each Summer Games they have contended at, except for the 1956 and 1964 Summer Olympics. 

Representatives George B. Fitch and William Maloney proposed the possibility of a Jamaican bobsleigh group in the wake of seeing a neighborhood cart derby in Jamaica. The President of the Jamaica Olympic Association at the time upheld the thought, thus arrangements were made to employ competitors. Promotions were set depicting "unsafe and thorough" preliminaries which would shape the premise of the nation's first bobsleigh group. Nonetheless, enlistment ended up being risky thus the Jamaica Defense Force was requested volunteers. This brought about the primary group of Dudley Stokes, Devon Harris and Michael White. These three were chosen as a component of the group in October 1987, with colleague Casewell Allen included later. 

With financing given by the Fitch and the Jamaica Tourist Board, preparing was led in Canada and Austria in anticipation of the 1988 Winter Olympics. Sepp Haidacher was enrolled as a mentor, and the group started to be highlighted in North American media with a hilarious edge. An understanding was come to with the Făšdăšration International de Bobsleigh et de Tobogganing so as to consider entrance in both the four-man and the two-man occasions at the Games. Once in Calgary, the group led trials on a solidified lake so as to become acclimated to the conditions, however Allen fell and was harmed. Chris Stokes, who was just in Canada so as to help his sibling Dudley, was added to the four-man group three days before the primary run having never been in a bobsleigh. 

The primary occasion which Jamaica contended in was the two-man bobsleigh, where Dudley Stokes and Michael White turned into Jamaica's first Winter Olympians. In their first run, they completed in 34th position, in front of the second New Zealand group, both of the sets from Portugal, U.S. Virgin Islands and Mexico. They improved in the second run, climbing to 22nd spot, yet were in 31st spot on the third run and completed just a single spot higher in 30th spot amid the fourth and last run. In general the pair completed in 30th spot out of the 41 groups contending. 

Following the end of the United States ice hockey group, American TV slots expected to fill broadcast appointment and concentrated on the Jamaican bobsleigh group in the four-man occasion. The principal run finished ineffectively, as when Dudley Stokes hopped into the bobsleigh, the push-bar in the sleigh broke, bringing about the group coming in third from toward the end in 24th spot. On their second endeavor, the group positioned second to last, due to some degree to White attempting to hunch down appropriately in his seat, remaining practically upstanding through the primary corner. 

It was the occasions of the third keep running for which the group turned out to be best known. Stirs harmed his shoulder before the race, however chose to proceed with the run. The group set the seventh-quickest begin for all contenders. At the turn called the "Kreisel", Stokes lost control of the bobsleigh and it pitched into the mass of the track, and flipped over the four competitors. The four colleagues moved out and drove the bobsleigh as far as possible of the track, before they stole it away. The group did not contend in the fourth keep running of the occasion, and accordingly were recorded as not completing the occasion and along these lines were put in the last spot generally speaking. 

The account of the Jamaican bobsleigh group at the 1988 Winter Olympics was transformed into the 1993 motion picture "Cool Runnings". Be that as it may, the film was just approximately dependent on real occasions, with genuine mentor Pat Brown later saying that the group had never encountered any of the ill will from different groups as delineated in the motion picture. 

The majority of the colleagues returned for the 1992 Winter Olympics, anyway Harris just contended in the two-man occasion, with his place in the four-man group taken by newcomer Ricky McIntosh. Harris and the Stokes siblings would keep on contending at the Winter Games in the bobsleigh occasions until the 1998 Winter Olympics in Nagano.