Give It All 

"Give It All" is a tune by American musical gang Rise Against. It was initially recorded for the 2004 assemblage collection "Shake Against Bush, Vol. 1", while a somewhat changed form showed up on the band's third studio collection "Alarm Song of the Counter Culture" soon thereafter. It is an in-your-face punk melody, with verses that are tied in with "being a punk rocker in this day and age," as indicated by lead vocalist Tim McIlrath. It was discharged as "Alarm Song of the Counter Culture" first single in October 2004. 

Regardless of accepting negligible inclusion from music pundits who evaluated "Alarm Song of the Counter Culture", "Give It All" has turned out to be one of Rise Against's most broadly perceived melodies, and is credited as the band's leap forward single. It has been highlighted on different arrangements of the best Rise Against tunes, and crested at number thirty-seven on the "Board" Alternative Songs graph. The going with music video has the band perform in a jam-packed metro vehicle, while other individuals travel all through the city of Chicago vandalizing and destroying bulletins and publications, with the expectation of raising social and political mindfulness. 

In the wake of going through quite a while as an underground band, in which they discharged two collections with Fat Wreck Chords, Rise Against marked a chronicle contract with Geffen Records in 2003. This arrangement was scrutinized by certain fans, who felt that a noteworthy record mark would upset the band's inventive procedure and contrarily sway their music. The principal melody the band discharged after their marking to Geffen was "Give It All", which was highlighted on the 2004 assemblage collection "Shake Against Bush, Vol. 1". The band preferred the melody, and chose to record a somewhat changed form for their third studio collection "Alarm Song of the Counter Culture" soon thereafter. 

"Give It All" is a short in-your-face punk track, with a quick pace and a moderate scaffold, and in the key of A noteworthy (in spite of the fact that the refrains, pre-theme, and extension begin with F-sharp minor). Lead vocalist Tim McIlrath remarked that the melody is "somewhat of a punk shake song of devotion about being a punk rocker in today’s world; like what being a person in today’s world resembles." Scott Heisel of Punknews.org felt that the "Stone Against Bush, Vol. 1" adaptation kept up the band's particular sound, and marking to a noteworthy record name had not changed the band's music. Davey Boy of Sputnikmusic noticed that the "Alarm Song of the Counter Culture" variant helped him to remember a harder form of melodies by the Offspring, and that it was sufficiently controlled to speak to easygoing rock fans. 

"Give It All" started playing on radio stations in October 2004, as the main single from "Alarm Song of the Counter Culture". Industrially, "Give It All" turned into the principal Rise Against melody to come to the "Board" Modern Rock Tracks diagram, topping at number thirty-seven on January 1, 2005. The tune was additionally on the soundtrack of Need for Speed Underground 2. 

Upon the arrival of "Alarm Song of the Counter Culture", "Give It All" got no inclusion from music pundits who evaluated the collection, beside Justin Donnelly of "Rankling", who depicted the piece as "somewhat conventional and forgettable". In spite of the absence of inclusion, it has turned out to be one of the band's most broadly perceived tunes, and John J. Moser of "The Morning Call" credits it as Rise Against's leap forward single. Dave Kim of WGRD-FM recorded "Give It All" as the fourth best Rise Against melody, while WatchMojo.com recorded it as the band's best tune. WatchMojo.com additionally positioned it as number ten on their rundown of the multi decade characterizing hard shake and overwhelming metal melodies of the 2000s. 

The going with music video was coordinated by James Cox, and shot in Chicago. In the video, Rise Against performs inside a metro vehicle on the Chicago "L". Travelers start boarding the vehicle in extensive amounts, and take part in a mosh pit, while the band keeps on performing. At the same time, different travelers leave the vehicle and travel all through the city during the evening, vandalizing and damaging boards and blurbs with the expectation of raising social and political mindfulness. Toward the beginning of the day, the vandals change into suits, and get down to business. 

The band was given a little spending plan to film the music video. McIlrath commented that the band did not have any desire to make a video that felt "extremely gooey or overproduced", and rather needed to fuse the melody's message. The prior night recording started, the band performed at a nearby scene, and requested that the gathering of people individuals star in the video; a few group of onlookers individuals came the next day. The tram vehicle included in the video kept on making its normal stops, while the band and the on-screen characters performed. Amid one scene in the video, the vandals sneak into the neighborhood zoo, and destroy a tiger confine with a sticker that says "I've gone through my whole time on earth caught in a pen". The zoo had not given consent for the band to film the tiger confine, out of dread it would harm their notoriety. The taping group decided to rather sneak into the zoo around evening time to film the scene. 

Credits adjusted from the liner notes of "Alarm Song of the Counter Culture". 

Extra staff