Adam Smith (footballer, conceived February 1985) 

Nathan Adam Smith (brought into the world 20 February 1985), known as Adam Smith, is an English semi-proficient footballer who plays as a winger. 

Smith got through the adolescent positions at Chesterfield, who had initially spotted him playing neighborhood football. He broke into the principal group squad in 2001 and made his presentation a year later. He was compelled to experience knee medical procedure in 2005 and has endured a few wounds amid his profession. He was advanced out to Lincoln City in 2008 and was discharged by Chesterfield after seven seasons at the club, after which he moved down to play in non-League football with Gainsborough Trinity, York City, Mansfield Town, Lincoln City, F.C. Halifax Town, Wrexham, Guiseley, Alfreton Town and Bradford Park Avenue. 

Smith was conceived in Huddersfield, West Yorkshire and played in the Huddersfield and District Association Football League for Lepton Highlanders. He trialed at Football League clubs Huddersfield Town and Oldham Athletic at the ages of 14 at 15 separately. While playing for Kirkheaton he was spotted by Chesterfield and was welcomed for a preliminary match, and was in the end offered a spot on the club' grant conspire. He started preparing with the primary group amid the 2001–02 season and was first named on the seat for Chesterfield's 1–0 triumph over Reading at the Madejski Stadium on 1 December 2001. He made his presentation in a Football League Trophy coordinate against Port Vale on 22 November 2002, where he went ahead as a substitute in the 77th moment, and scored in the punishment shoot-out that was in the end lost 4–3. His Football League debut went ahead 13 September 2003 in the wake of going ahead as a substitute for the harmed Mark DeBolla in the 79th moment of a 1–0 thrashing to Notts County. He proceeded to show up that month against Brighton and Hove Albion and Brentford, where he played on the left wing. He was offered a two-year proficient contract with Chesterfield in March 2004, powerful from 2004–05. His first association begin for Chesterfield arrived in a 1–0 annihilation to Hull City on 10 October. He experienced laparoscopic medical procedure on his knee to fix ligament harm in February 2005, which was required to preclude him for about a month and a half. He made his arrival on 18 March in the wake of going ahead as a 60th-minute substitute for Carlos Logan in a 2–2 draw with Brentford. Not long after in the wake of making his arrival, he got damage to one side lower leg, which was supported amid Chesterfield's 3–2 thrashing to Bournemouth. This precluded him for the remainder of the period, which he completed with 19 appearances. 

He was fit for the beginning of 2005–06 and set up two of Chesterfield's objectives in the 3–1 opening day triumph over Blackpool. He proceeded to score his first objectives for Chesterfield with a prop in the wake of going ahead as a half-time substitute against Yeovil Town; he scored from a go from Paul Hall after Yeovil goalkeeper Chris Weale was left stranded in the wake of being hurled, and after that scored his second in the wake of picking up the ball from Mark Allott, which helped his group to a 3–1 triumph. A 89th-minute objective from Smith against Bradford City on 7 January 2006 saw his group gain a 1–0 triumph. He consented to another two-year contract at Chesterfield in March and completed 2005–06 with 29 appearances and scoring three objectives. His repetitive knee damage was affirmed to be serious patella tendinitis, which brought about him being unfit for the beginning of 2006–07. He made his arrival to activity in a well disposed against Staveley Miners Welfare in August and showed up of the period in a 4–0 thrashing to Nottingham Forest on 2 September 2006 in the wake of going ahead as a 63rd-minute substitute. He scored the champ for Chesterfield in the Football League Trophy against Oldham Athletic with a corner to corner shot from separation. Smith experienced knee damage in March 2007, which brought about him experiencing medical procedure that discounted him for the rest of the 2006–07 season; in which he showed up and scored one objective, while Chesterfield were consigned to League Two. His extreme tendinitis influenced him in September, and in the end made his arrival in a 2–1 annihilation to Tranmere Rovers in the FA Cup initially round on 10 November. He was conveyed on advance at League Two club Lincoln City for a month on 4 January 2008 and made his presentation for the group multi day later, helping set up the main objective in a 2–0 triumph over Rochdale, after Jamie Forrester scored from goalkeeper Sam Russell's repel of a Smith exertion. He showed up amid his stay at Lincoln, all as a substitute, which was closed after Lincoln ruled against expanding his advance at the club. 

Smith was discharged by Chesterfield after he was not offered another agreement toward the finish of 2007–08. He trialed with Darlington of League Two, however was told by chief Dave Penney he was not what they were searching for. He at that point had a preliminary with recently consigned Conference Premier club Wrexham and in the end marked an agreement with Gainsborough Trinity of the Conference North in late August. Smith made a goalscoring debut for Gainsborough with the group's objective in a 1–1 attract at home to Vauxhall Motors on 30 August. He joined York City in the Conference Premier on credit on 27 November, getting to be Martin Foyle's first marking as director, in an arrangement that would lapse on 6 January 2009. Smith made his introduction subsequent to going ahead as a 63rd-minute substitute for Craig Farrell in a 1–1 draw with Salisbury City. His first objective came in the wake of scoring the opener for York with a short proximity complete in a 3–1 triumph over Ebbsfleet United. Following this, Foyle expressed his expectation of expanding Smith's advance at York. Smith said he was hoping to join the club on a lasting contract and that Gainsborough supervisor Steve Charles would enable him to leave for a club in a higher division on a free exchange. Be that as it may, a move to York slowed down in January as Gainsborough were waiting for a charge, despite the fact that Foyle would not pay this. York in the long run made an idea of a fourth of Gainsborough's asking value, which was rejected. 

He marked for York forever on 26 January for an undisclosed expense on an agreement until the finish of 2009–10 season. His first appearance subsequent to returning came as a 74th-minute substitute in a 1–1 draw against Altrincham on 27 January. A wounded foot grabbed in a save group coordinate implied he was unfit to play for York against Grays Athletic in April. He was constrained into missing a few matches towards the finish of 2008–09 because of worries over his infant little girl, which he completed with 17 appearances and two objectives for York. Smith showed up of 2009–10 in the wake of being presented as a 86th-minute substitute against Rushden and Diamonds on 11 August, the second match of the period, which completed as a 0–0 draw. In the accompanying match, he entered the 87th moment and played as a striker, scoring York's second objective in a 2–0 triumph over Forest Green Rovers. Not long after this match, he experienced sciatica amid an instructional meeting. He highlighted as a substitute in York's play-off semi-last first leg triumph over Luton Town, which completed 1–0, with the tie finishing 2–0 on total. Subsequent to completing the season with 34 appearances and two objectives for York he entered dealings with the club over another agreement. 

He in the long run turned down chats with York and consented to sign a one-year contract with individual Conference group Mansfield Town on 19 May. On marking, Smith said "It was the ideal opportunity for a change after not getting as much football as I would have enjoyed. I'm as yet youthful, Mansfield are going the correct way and I'm amped up for the new season". He made his presentation in the opening match of 2010–11, a 3–1 triumph over Forest Green, and was substituted in the 80th moment. Smith scored his first objective for Mansfield in a 4–0 triumph over Altrincham on 30 August. A red card in the 61st moment of a 1–0 annihilation away to Gateshead on 2 October for a high test brought about a three match suspension. He completed the season with 38 appearances and six objectives. 

Having been confined to three appearances as a substitute for Mansfield in 2011–12, Smith joined League Two club Aldershot Town on a one-month advance on 7 October 2011. He came back to Mansfield on 10 November to get treatment for a slight back strain, before re-marking for Aldershot on credit until 7 January 2012 on 23 November. 

Smith marked for Conference rivals Lincoln City on a one-year contract on 21 June 2012. He made his presentation in the wake of beginning Lincoln's 1–0 triumph once again Kidderminster Harriers on 11 August 2012, which was the group's opening match of 2012–13. He completed the season with 37 appearances and two objectives. 

Smith joined recently advanced Conference club F.C. Halifax Town on 2 July 2013, making his presentation in their 5–1 thrashing without end to Cambridge United in the opening match of 2013–14 on 11 August. He marked for Halifax's National League rivals Wrexham on 18 June 2015. On 5 November 2015, he joined their divisional adversaries Guiseley on credit until January 2016. Smith had a beneficial outcome in eight appearances while on credit, which prompted Guiseley marking him for all time on 5 January 2016. 

Smith's time at Guiseley was brief and he marked with Alfreton Town on 5 October 2016. Making his introduction in a National League North match away to F.C. Joined of Manchester, Smith scored two objectives in a 4–3 thrashing. He re-marked for National League North club Gainsborough Trinity on 5 January 2018. He showed up the following day as a half-time substitute in a 4–0 thrashing without end to Blyth Spartans, before marking for Gainsborough's divisional opponents Bradford Park Avenue on 26 January 2018. He was discharged toward the finish of 2017–18. 

Smith marked for Northern Premier League Premier Division club Matlock Town on 30 July 2018. He left the club on 3 October 2018 after chats with supervisor Dave Frecklington. 

Smith is a correct winger who has likewise played on the left, in spite of the fact that in this position his intersection capacity is diminished. He has been depicted as a "flying winger", whose play is "attacking" and "scrounging". He is likewise fit for playing as a striker. 

Smith grew up as a supporter of main residence club Huddersfield Town and Manchester United. In the wake of leaving Chesterfield, he began concentrating a course in games knead treatment. In January 2017, he got a suspended jail sentence when discovered blameworthy of misrepresentation.