Silver Bullet (crazy ride) 

Silver Bullet is a western-themed steel rearranged thrill ride structured by Bolliger and Mabillard situated at Knott's Berry Farm, a carnival in Buena Park, California. The $16 million crazy ride was declared on December 1, 2003 and opened on December 7, 2004. A first rider sell off was likewise held where individuals would offer on seats to be the primary riders. The track is roughly long and the lift slope is about tall. The ride endures two minutes and thirty seconds and highlights six reversals including a vertical circle, cobra move, zero-g roll, and two corkscrews. 

On May 28, 2003, a trademark for the name "Silver Bullet" was documented by Cedar Fair, the proprietors of the recreation center. Development for the new thrill ride started in September 2003 with the movement of The Church of Reflections. As a major aspect of a $85 million interest in all Cedar Fair stops, Silver Bullet was reported to the general population on December 1, 2003. The last bit of track was put on September 30, 2004. On November 5, 2004, Knott's Berry Farm propelled a "First Rider Auction" in which individuals from anyplace on the planet would offer against one another so as to be one of the main open riders on Silver Bullet on December 7, 2004. Albeit sixty seats were made accessible, just 13 of these got offers. Out of those offers, the most elevated offer was $200 (US), and an aggregate of $1643 was collected with all the cash setting off to the Speech and Language Development Center of Buena Park. After development and testing was finished, the thrill ride opened first to the media, at that point to the general population on December 7, 2004 however the underlying planned opening was on Christmas Eve of 2004. Silver Bullet was likewise one of four attractions that opened at Knott's Berry Farm around the same time and conveys a western topic. 

Silver Bullet's design goes through three of the recreation center's themed territories: Ghost Town, Fiesta Village, and Indian Trails. 

After the train withdraws from the station, it makes a 90 degree right turn before starting to climb the lift slope. Once at the top, the train experiences a pre-drop before entering the descending right drop. Once at the base, the train enters a vertical circle. In the wake of leaving the circle, the train makes a banked left transform driving into the cobra roll. Very quickly after, the train experiences a zero-gravity roll pursued by a descending left helix. At that point, the train enters the first of two corkscrews which are isolated by a banked left turn. Next, the train enters an upward left helix (the start of the helix is near water) before entering the brake run. The train at that point makes a correct transform into a second, shorter, brake run which drives straight back to the station. One cycle keeps going roughly two minutes and thirty seconds. 

The steel track of Silver Bullet is roughly long, and the stature of the lift is around high. Silver Bullet, alongside all of Bolliger and Mabillard's other crazy rides, was made by Clermont Steel Fabricators situated in Batavia, Ohio and raised by Coan Construction Company. The track is loaded up with sand to decrease the commotion made by the trains. Silver Bullet was additionally the first Bolliger and Mabillard transformed crazy ride to utilize attractive brakes in the brake run. The track and supports of the second brake raced to the lift slope is all red, with the rest of the track being yellow with red rails and the rest of the backings hued white. 

Silver Bullet works with two steel and fiberglass trains, with a third kept for possible later use for upkeep. Each train has eight vehicles that can situate four riders in a solitary column, for a sum of 32 riders for each train. The seats are shaded light blue, with orange over-the-bear limitations and tri-shading wheel covers (red, orange, and yellow). 

Joel Taylor from "Entertainment Business" commended the ride saying, "On the whole, it's an elating 2 1/2 minutes all the way." He was additionally awed with the ride's smoothness and generally energy, expressing that the ride is, "smooth and agreeable while conveying curving, stomach-agitating fervor." 

Since Silver Bullet's presentation in 2004, it has reliably been positioned in the best 140 positions in Mitch Hawker's Best Roller Steel Coaster Poll. It crested at position 99 of every 2010. The exciting ride has never set on the Golden Ticket Awards.