Ao Man Long 

Ao Man Long (conceived in Macau, December 1956) was the primary Secretary for Transport and Public Works of the Macau Special Administrative Region of the People's Republic of China, from 20 December 1999 to 6 December 2006. 

On 8 December 2006, Ao was captured dependent on a case worked by the Macau Commission Against Corruption, making him the most elevated positioning authority captured ever of. Ao had purportedly offered inclination in government works extends, and had amassed resources totalling 804 million patacas. On 30 January 2008, Ao was discovered liable on 40 tallies of reward taking, among others, and was condemned to 27 years in jail. Ao was helped and abetted by four relatives, who were additionally imprisoned for somewhere in the range of 10 and 18 years for illegal tax avoidance. On 31 May 2012, Ao was discovered liable of accepting hush money of more than 31.9 million patacas, and got a sentence of 29 years in jail. Joseph Lau and Steven Lo are both involved and have been accused of offering several millions in rewards to Ao. 

Ao's graduation from Yuet Wah College, Macau. He graduated with a Bachelor's certificate in structural designing at National Taiwan University in 1982, and a Master of Business Administration at the University of Macao. Ao joined the legislature in 1987. He was named as the principal Secretary for Transport and Public Works after the handover of Macau from Portugal to the PRC on 20 December 1999. 

On 6 December 2006, Ao was captured for purportedly accepting hush money and having occupied with unpredictable budgetary exercises. The Macau Commission Against Corruption (CAC) asserted that somewhere in the range of 2002 and 2006 Ao got MOP 187 million in influences from three land and development organizations, two from Macau and one from the terrain, as an end-result of which Ao had purportedly offered inclination in 20 government works ventures. Ao purportedly had resources not comparable with his income: Ao and his better half earned 14 million patacas from their official posts somewhere in the range of 2000 and 2006, yet had aggregated resources totalling 804 million patacas (US$100m), proportional to multiple times their profit. Ao was accused of 76 checks, including defilement, reward taking, illegal tax avoidance and maltreatment of intensity. 

As per Article 50 of the Basic Law of Macau, the expulsion of clergymen would require Central Government endorsement. Refering to "undeniable proof" of inappropriate conduct, Chief Executive Edmund Ho requested that Beijing expel Ao from office. 

Ao Man-long stood preliminary in Macau on 5 November 2007, confronting 30 years in jail. Given Ao's status of Government Secretary (proportional to Minister), he was attempted legitimately in the Court of Final Appeal of the Macau SAR. More than one hundred observers were called to affirm. 

In spite of the fact that it was an open preliminary, the 500-page prosecution was not made open. Media agents appealed to for its discharge, however it was denied by judge Viriato Manuel Pinheiro de Lima, who said it would influence observers' considerations and declaration. The arraignment accused Ao of having gotten a huge number of dollars in kickbacks for contracts, including those for the arch developed for the 2005 East Asian Games, the Venetian and the Galaxy StarWorld Hotel, from Ho Meng-fai, Chairman of San Meng Fai Engineering and Construction Company. 

Against defilement officers were supported accidentally by Ao, who kept subtleties of each illicit exchange and the kickbacks he got in a scratch pad. Ho Meng-fai – who had bounced safeguard – admitted in articulations given to the CAC and the procurator's office that Ao offered to prescribe his organization to remote financial specialists in return for 2 to 3 percent of the triumphant tenders. Ho said somewhere in the range of 2004 and 2006, he paid Ao about HK$140 million in kickbacks, for private tasks as it were. Amid the preliminary, 7 witnesses, including Ho, disappeared. 

Ao supposedly set up shell organizations a system of mystery financial balances in Hong Kong and the British Virgin Islands with the assistance of loved ones to launder fix cash. Ao's dad Ao Veng-kong, sibling Ao Man-fu, and sister-in-law Ao Chan Va-choi were accused of setting up abroad ledgers and shell organizations for Ao Man-long to deal with kickbacks. The all out stores in excess of twelve Hong Kong financial balances under his dad's name surpassed HK$157 million as of December 2006. The three relatives argued not liable, guaranteeing Ao Man-since a long time ago opened the financial balances for them. All relatives were condemned to jail terms by a choice of the Macau Court of Second Instance on 30 October 2008. 

On 30 January 2008, Ao was discovered blameworthy on 40 checks of influence taking, 13 tallies of illegal tax avoidance, two tallies of maltreatment of intensity, one tally of mistaken announcement of benefits and one tally of holding resources from obscure sources; Ao was condemned to 27 years in jail. About MOP 252 million of his benefits in Macau were seized. Ao chose not to claim. There were concerns voiced in the Macau media that Ao was the fall-fellow, as most Macanese were suspicious that debasement on such a scale could occur without any other individual knowing or being included. Amid his preliminary, Ao implied that contacts esteemed at more than 6 million Patacas required the endorsement of his unrivaled in government, Edmond Ho. 

In a different preliminary, his significant other was condemned "in absentia" to 23 years in prison for her job in laundering cash. Ao's four relatives, each blamed for six to 14 tallies of illegal tax avoidance exercises, were additionally imprisoned for somewhere in the range of 10 and 18 years. Ao's better half is accepted to have fled to the United Kingdom. Macau experts were co-working with the ICAC in Hong Kong to recover an expected HK$637 million (US$81.7 million), which was allegedly saved in 39 Hong Kong ledgers in Ao's name and 92 abroad financial balances opened for the sake of his relative-assistants. 

Ao recorded a movement under the watchful eye of the Court of Appeal to un-solidify a portion of his own ledgers, in light of the fact that those records were as far as anyone knows not connected to the defilement case, and were the genuine records for getting his pay. The movement was denied on 26 September 2008: as per the decision of his debasement preliminary, all his cash and individual belongings, regardless of whether obtained legitimately, presently had a place with Macau. 

In March 2008, reports developed that a new arrangement of criminal procedures identified with different demonstrations of debasement were being explored by the Macau Commission Against Corruption. Likewise, the relatives and the businesspeople purportedly included were engaging their feelings. 

A second preliminary occurred under the watchful eye of the Court of Final Appeal. A ultimate conclusion was given on 22 April 2009, and the all out punishment was expanded from 27 years of detainment to 28 and a half years. 

On 31 May 2012, Ao was discovered liable of accepting kickbacks of more than 31.9 million patacas. Joseph Lau and Steven Lo are both involved and have been accused of offering MCP20 million in influences to Ao to verify five plots of land close to the airplane terminal in Macau. The judge commented that "no different authorities engaged with defilement in Asia and different nations can think about" to Ao. The most extreme correctional facility term is 30 years, as per the laws of Macau, in this manner the judge requested Ao serve his 29-year term simultaneous with his reality sentence.