Joseph Staten 

Joseph Michael Staten is an American author best known for his work at computer game studio Bungie. 

At Bungie, Staten filled in as chief of cinematics for the studio's recreations, including the "Radiance" arrangement; he would compose mission contents and motion picture discourse for the titles. He has additionally been associated with dealing with the extension of the "Corona" establishment to other diversion studios and makers, including Peter Jackson's Wingnut Interactive. In spite of the fact that not a distributed writer beforehand, Tor Books drew nearer Staten to compose the fifth "Corona" novelization, "". Discharged in 2007, the novel came to #3 on "The New York Times" success list in the main seven day stretch of its discharge and got positive surveys. Staten rejoined Microsoft Studios as a senior inventive executive on January 9, 2014. 

Joseph Staten is the child of a clergyman who is an educator of religious philosophy and reasoning of religion. He was conceived in San Francisco, California. Staten entered Northwestern University in 1990 with the yearning of turning into an expert on-screen character. Acknowledging he was not driving man material, he changed his concentration to different subjects and graduated with a Bachelor of Science qualification in correspondence and universal investigations in 1994. Staten additionally has learned at the University of Chicago, where he got a Master of Arts degree in global relations in 1997. 

Subsequent to being rejected for work with the Central Intelligence Agency, Staten dropped entering the remote administration and rather helped his family at their winery in Sonoma Valley. He sought after various occupations before turning into a staff part at diversion engineer Bungie in 1998 subsequent to meeting a portion of the designers in online "Fantasy" matches. 

Staten's previous job at Bungie was executive of cinematics and was in charge of the in-amusement motion pictures for Bungie's "", "Corona 2", and "Radiance 3". Work on the recreations at "time to get down to business" included 80-hour weeks and stretches without rest maximizing at 72 hours. Staten worked close by three other staff essayists at Bungie, each with their very own different job: Frank O'Connor created "Radiance 3"s battle exchange, Rob McLees concentrated on "Corona" group and working with authorizing accomplices, Luke Smith associated with the fans on the web, and Staten built up the cinematics and missions contents. Staten said in a meeting that he thought of it as trying to compose for the amusements, as "first individual shooters [are] about composition 'between the bullets'"—relating plot data to the players in the middle of activity arrangements. "You should be proficient and astute to give players the story—the context—they need. However, you would prefer not to push excessively hard or they'll dismiss it." During his work on the diversions he read sci-fi works by Iain Banks, Robert A. Heinlein, and Vernor Vinge. Notwithstanding his composition commitments, Staten loans his voice to little outsiders known as Grunts in every one of the three computer games. 

In spite of the fact that past "Radiance" books had been composed by expert essayists like Eric Nylund and William C. Dietz, distributer Tor Books picked Staten to compose the fifth "Radiance" novelization, entitled "". Editorial manager Eric Raab noted in the book's public statement that "who better to tell the story" of mankind's experience with the opposing outsider Covenant than Staten, who had "close learning" of the arrangement's story. The tale is an outfit piece, with the activity being described from both human and outsider perspectives; crafted by Staten's most loved sci-fi creators helped show him the significance of sharpening a "solid, predictable voice". Staten found that composition convincing activity included backing things off, incomprehensibly the inverse of the quick paced ongoing interaction of a "Radiance" title. He considered the book the ideal method to expand on the "Radiance" story without stripping it down for a computer game, and substance out the character of Avery Johnson more than the recreations had permitted. 

On discharge, "Contact Harvest" achieved a top spot of #3 on the "New York Times" smash hit rundown, where it stayed for about a month. The tale likewise showed up on the "USA Today" blockbusters list in the meantime. Commentators noticed that in spite of being a dubious author, Staten had prevailing with regards to making a phenomenal novel. The epic's prosperity was viewed as proof that amusements were breaking into the standard, and that the class was ending up progressively about the story. 

After "Contact Harvest"s discharge Staten assumed an essential job in the advancement of branches to the "Corona" establishment. He made a trip to New Zealand a few times to work with Peter Jackson and Weta Workshop. Staten helped with the fiction of Ensemble Studios title "Radiance Wars", and the now-deferred "Corona" film. In meetings, Staten has clarified that the amusement's hero, the Master Chief, would fill in as a supporting character as opposed to who the film would concentrate on. He took a shot at story improvement for the "Radiance 3" extension, "". Staten gave the voices to various characters as placeholder sound amid the illustrative play testing of the diversion in December 2008. Staten was last working for Bungie as the essayist and structure executive for Destiny. On September 24, 2013, Bungie reported that Staten had left the organization to seek after new imaginative difficulties. 

Staten rejoined Microsoft Studios as a senior innovative chief on January 9, 2014. On March 12, 2015, 343 Industries' authentic site posted a blog entry itemizing a rundown of up and coming "Radiance" books. One of the books recorded is "Radiance: Shadow of Intent" created by Joseph Staten and discharged on December 7, 2015. He is the lead author for Microsoft's "ReCore", which was discharged on September 13, 2016. 

Staten is hitched and has two kids. On June 18, 2011, he gave the assembly address to the class of 2011 of the Northwestern University School of Communication .