Ridgedale Center 

Ridgedale Center, casually known as Ridgedale, is an encased shopping center in Minnetonka, Minnesota, a western suburb of the Twin Cities. It is straightforwardly situated off I-394/US 12 between Ridgedale Drive and Plymouth Road (Hennepin CSAH 61). Ridgedale Center involves leaseable retail space, and contains around 140 retail inhabitants. It is presently mutually possessed by Brookfield Properties Retail Group and CBRE Group, and overseen by Brookfield. Grapples are JCPenney, Macy's, Nordstrom and Sears. 

Worked in 1974, it was initially moored by Dayton's, Donaldson's, JCPenney, and Sears, before the initial two stays converged with different organizations. The shopping center has experienced a few developments and redesigns consistently, including the ongoing expansion of a Nordstrom retail chain in 2015. Considered an "upscale strip mall", Ridgedale incorporates different extravagance brands, for example, Michael Kors, Swarovski, and TUMI. 

Ridgedale Center was built on 81.3 sections of land of land in 1974 by the Dayton–Hudson Corporation, turning into the Twin Cities' fourth 'dale' strip mall, following Southdale, Brookdale, and Rosedale. The first focus included retail space, and was secured by Dayton's, Donaldson's, JCPenney, and Sears, the previous of which likewise built up the inside. 

Dayton's declared plans in the mid 1990s to tear down their present area at Ridgedale, and supplant it with an a lot bigger area in a similar shopping center; these plans were likewise made at the other 'dale' focuses, as Southdale and Rosedale. Be that as it may, these plans were in the long run rejected and never happened. In 1996, Dayton's opened up a second stay store at the inside; this new store concentrated on men's apparel and furniture, while the first area changed spotlight and ended up fixated on ladies' and youngsters' attire; the two stores were separated by their new titles, "Men's and Home Store" and "Ladies' and Children's Store". 

In 1987, Donaldson's declared the merger with Chicago-based retail chain Carson Pirie Scott. The Carson Pirie Scott store would likewise in the end leave Ridgedale Center, in 1995. Mervyn's, a California-based retail establishment, declared enthusiasm for the previous structure, however never opened, regardless of opening areas at previous Carson's areas at Brookdale Center, Eden Prairie Center, and Rosedale Center. In 2001, Dayton's converged with Chicago-based Marshall Field's, which converged with Macy's in 2006. 

In mid 2007, Ridgedale experienced a multimillion-dollar redesign to "refresh and light up" the shopping center, with the utilization of "all-new lighting, flooring, and paint."<ref name="Minneapolis/St. Paul Business Journal Article #1"></ref> The remodel likewise incorporated the expansion of new bathrooms and seating regions. Consummation of the redesign procedure happened later that equivalent year. The inside was additionally quickly referenced in the financially effective 2007 film "Juno". 

In 2009, Nordstrom declared designs to open an area at Ridgedale in 2011; be that as it may, these plans were later dropped because of General Growth Properties, the shopping center's proprietor, seeking financial protection. This declaration accompanied the conclusion of the Macy's Men's and Home Store. Later in 2013, Nordstrom affirmed intends to open up a retail establishment at Ridgedale by 2015; these plans permitted Macy's present grapple of to develop into a bigger, area. The present Macy's Women's and Children's Store was extended to give extra space to the blend; amid this procedure, a noteworthy flame happened at the building site, postponing the development by half a month. 

On June 4, 2014, deconstruction of the Men's and Home Store happened, to clear path for the new Nordstrom store, in addition to an extra of leaseable space, apparently for upscale retail and feasting options.<ref name="Minneapolis/St. Paul Business Journal Article #2"></ref> This development was assessed at $50 million, as indicated by General Growth Properties. The Nordstrom area authoritatively opened on October 2, 2015, trailed by a fantastic opening function. 

On October 15, 2018, it was declared that Sears had petitioned for financial protection and plans on shutting 142 stores. These terminations incorporate the Sears at Ridgedale, which will hold a liquidation deal until the year's end.