James Dudley 

James Dudley (May 12, 1910 – June 1, 2004) was an American baseball player, proficient wrestling chief, and expert wrestling official. He played Negro alliance baseball for a long time however is best known for his time with the World Wide Wrestling Federation. Dudley was the primary African-American to run a noteworthy United States field (Turner's Arena in Washington, D.C.). He worked with four ages of wrestling's McMahon family and was especially close with Vincent J. McMahon. At age 74, he was returned on the organization's finance to demonstrate gratefulness for his work for the McMahons. He additionally dealt with a few wrestlers in the WWWF and was enlisted into the WWF Hall of Fame class of 1994. 

Dudley was considered a "superb competitor" and ran the 100-yard dash in less than ten seconds on numerous events. In spite of the fact that he appeared for the preliminaries for the 1924 United States Olympic group, he was not permitted to partake in light of the fact that African Americans were not allowed in the group. In the wake of playing semi-proficient baseball in Baltimore, Maryland, Dudley marked with the Baltimore Elite Giants at age 27. Nicknamed "Enormous Train", he played catcher yet begun helping pitchers warm up in the warm up area. Playing close by two other capable catchers, Roy Campanella and Eggie Clarke, Dudley's playing time was constrained. He stayed with the Elite Giants until leaving proficient baseball in 1945. Altogether, he played around 60 recreations in the Negro groups. 

James Dudley started working for Jess McMahon during the 1950s, when McMahon was a co-proprietor of the Capitol Wrestling Corporation. Whenever McMahon and his accomplices split far from the National Wrestling Alliance to shape the World Wide Wrestling Federation (WWWF) in 1963, Dudley kept on working for McMahon. Dudley performed a wide range of occupations, from conveying pails of waters to tallying ticket deals. Dudley was a dear companion of Vincent J. McMahon and kept working for the family when the more youthful McMahon assumed control over the business from his dad; specifically, he drove McMahon's limousine and filled in as his protector. He has said that he thought of McMahon as a dad figure. McMahon later expanded Dudley's duties with the organization a few times, and in the end appointed him to deal with Turner's Arena in Washington, D.C., which made Dudley the main African-American to hold such a situation in the United States. His job expected him to administer a few different occasions, including the "Town and Country Jamboree" network show. 

Dudley additionally dealt with a few wrestlers, including Bobo Brazil. Preceding Brazil's matches, Dudley energized the groups by waving a towel while racing to the ring. After some time, Dudley's job with the organization lessened and he stopped working for them; the organization's tasks were moved to Connecticut, and Turner's Arena was crushed. In the blink of an eye before McMahon's demise in 1984, he told his child, Vincent K. McMahon, who had assumed control over control of the advancement (at that point known as the WWF), "Whatever else you do, you deal with James Dudley." After Vincent J. McMahon's demise, Dudley was returned on the organization finance at age 74 and accordingly gotten a few presents from Vincent K. McMahon to demonstrate thankfulness for Dudley's commitments to the organization. Dudley has been portrayed as an "essential machine gear-piece" in the organization, and McMahon once expressed that "had there been no James Dudley, the WWF conceivably wouldn't exist as it does today". Dudley kept on inclination a feeling of dedication to the McMahons and their advancement. Dudley was drafted into the WWF Hall of Fame class of 1994 by Vincent K. McMahon. 

Dudley's last appearance with the organization came amid the January 4, 2002 scene of "SmackDown!" . As per the storyline, Stephanie McMahon was prohibited from the MCI Center. While trying to move beyond security, she pushed Dudley in a wheelchair yet was still declined passage. Following the scene, Dudley left the wheelchair, strolled to his seat, and watched the show. 

Dudley kept on living in Washington, D.C. subsequent to resigning from expert wrestling. He had 38 grandkids, 34 extraordinary grandkids, and 16 incredible extraordinary grandkids. Dudley kicked the bucket of common causes on June 1, 2004 at 94 years old.