Edinburgh Place Ferry Pier 

Edinburgh Place Ferry Pier (), regularly alluded to as the "Star Ferry" Pier, was a dock in Edinburgh Place, Central, Hong Kong, serving the Star Ferry. The dock, with its clock tower, was a noticeable waterfront milestone. Worked in 1957 at the tallness of the Modern Movement, it was the third era of the Star Ferry Pier in Central, and was situated close to the City Hall and the General Post Office. 

The dock was the focal flashpoint of the Hong Kong revolts in 1966, and after 40 years turned into the focal point of an encounter among traditionalists and the administration, which needed to devastate the wharf to consider recovery. The ship administration from the dock was suspended on 11 November 2006, and moved to wharfs 7 and 8 of Central Piers. Destruction started on 12 December, and was finished in mid 2007. 

The whole waterfront where the "third era" dock was arranged was made in the late 1950s after a noteworthy land recovery. The shoreline was moved from its situation at the time, level to the Mandarin Hotel. The dock was worked in 1957 in Edinburgh Place, at the stature of the Modern Movement, close to the City Hall complex which was being arranged at the time. 

The Star Ferry Pier was structured by a neighborhood Chinese draftsman, Hung Yip Chan (conceived in 1921). He worked in the Architectural Office (AO) of the Hong Kong Government from 1952 to 1957 as an associate designer. He planned the faă§ade of the wharf, and the Chief Architect, Michael Wright, added the Clock Tower to make the dock increasingly adjusted and down to earth. 

The rings of the turret clock introduced at the wharf denoted each quarter-hour since the dock's initiation in 1957. The clock was a blessing from John Keswick, who had thusly gotten it from the Prince of Belgium. The component was produced by British organization Edward John Dent, which additionally gave the mechanical mark to "Enormous Ben" of London. 

There is a noteworthy transport end on the Kowloon side, which is helpfully arranged near the Tsim Sha Tsui Ferry Pier. A huge number of inhabitants went through this main portal to Hong Kong Island from the Kowloon Peninsula day by day from 1957 until 2006. Notwithstanding, the introduction of the Cross Harbor Tunnel in 1972 advanced vehicular travel over the harbor and diminished the progression of travelers. From 1972 to 2006, the ship was as yet utilized by numerous individuals as the most brief course from Tsim Sha Tsui (TST) to Central District, and a day by day normal of 74,000 traveler trips were made over the harbor in 2004. 

On the island side, different courses of the New World First Bus, Citybus, and open light transports associated with numerous goals on Hong Kong Island. 

The arrangement to migrate the Central Ferry Piers goes back to July 1999, when proposed alterations to the draft Central District (Extension) Outline Zoning Plan covering the Central Reclamation III territory were distributed. Both the third era Star Ferry Pier and Queen's Pier would be crushed and 16 hectares of land straightforwardly before the fourth-age wharf recovered to clear path for a six-path street and a low-ascent strip mall. The expense was evaluated at HK$3.5 billion. The Government said that the authentic essentialness of the third-age wharf would be perceived and guaranteed to reproduce the milestone on the new waterfront. 

In 2001, an effect evaluation for the Central Reclamation suggested the movement of the Star Ferry Pier, and this was endorsed by the Antiquities Advisory Board in 2002. 

3D Laser Scanning Technology in computerized recording of structures was connected to catch three-dimensional pictures of the dock before the annihilation. 

Following the wharf's decommissioning on 12 November 2006, annihilation work began in the midst of challenges. The destruction was initially booked for the early piece of 2007, however annihilation was presented by 3 months, to 12 December 2006. The legislature overlooked a nonbinding movement in September in the Legislative Council of Hong Kong encouraging it to hold the wharf and clock tower. 

The pulverization group assumed responsibility for the site by raising framework on 6 December 2006, and destruction initiated on 12 December. Laborers brought down the clock system and clock face, leaving a vast opening, and afterward continued to lift the check tower off in one piece. After the dissenters had been scattered, the rest of the wharf was totally destroyed, far from the glare of attention. 

In spite of the fact that the size of the stage 3 recovery in Central was reduced from 32 to 18 hectares, the destiny of the docks was fixed by the recovery. The dock turned into the focal point of a severe battle between the Government and protectionists, who restricted either further annihilation of the harbor or the further loss of recorded structures. 

Specialists who arranged the Environmental Impact Assessment report in 2001 for the Central recovery noticed the wharf's critical job in Hong Kong's vehicle history. The Government was cautioned that an open kickback could be normal when the full ramifications of the recovery were known. 

In any case, the Government had kept up that the Pier and its pinnacle was not mature enough to be delegated "chronicled" and that individuals were not really "worried about the structure itself". To some degree, it was not wrong, since the activists were primarily battling for the safeguarding of an open spot and against the strategies and urban arranging arrangements of its administration, saw to support business interests over the open intrigue. The battle to protect the Star Ferry and, later, the Queen's Pier, was the event to bring up issues on Hong Kong's history, the subject of expansionism, and that of majority rule government in the HKSAR. 

The Government had terribly thought little of the solid open assumption about this 49-year-old milestone in the "aggregate memory" of Hong Kong occupants. By its own review confirmation, it needed authenticity: a Government representative surrendered that the it had neglected to pick up the ethical high ground. 

Ship travelers would confront a lengthier trek to achieve the new dock. By migrating the new docks 300â m away, it is evaluated that the Star Ferry could lose maybe 13 percent or a greater amount of travelers because of its burden. On the Tsim Sha Tsui side of the harbor, the proposed migration of the transport end which goes about as a feeder for the ship is gauge to additionally decrease traveler numbers by one-fifth. 

This misfortune, totalling 33% of its travelers, would convert into income loss of some HK$17 million for each annum for Star Ferry. 

Designers and protectionists contended that the wharf was structurally critical to Hong Kong as one of the final instances of a Streamline Moderne open structure (alongside the Central Market and Wan Chai Market which have been reserved for devastation); socially the dock was generally perceived as a piece of nearby aggregate memory. The Hong Kong Institute of Architects cautioned against the devastation of Hong Kong's legacy, saying it would be an irreversible error. General assessment has brought about choices advanced to protect the clock tower, including moving the proposed six-path street or moving the clock tower to the front of the new dock as a remembrance. 

One reason refered to by the Government against the migration of the turret clock and tower was that a specialist attainability contemplate prompted that there was "no certification the clock and rings would keep on working after movement, because of their age and outdated segments". Notwithstanding, Neil Brennon Wright of Thwaites and Reed, the world's longest working clockmaking firm, who touched base from England on 18 December 2006 to analyze the clock, said that his firm had reestablished far more awful. 

The Government guaranteed that it would "remake" the tolls of the clock, total with the compensation of the first clock appearances and instrument at some close-by area. 

The open clamor, foreseen by the consultancy report for the Antiquities and Monuments Office, was to moved toward becoming reality. With the unavoidable risk of annihilation, the nearby network revitalized to spare dock, to boundless media inclusion. In the weeks running up to the discontinuance of administration from the wharf, a huge number of Hong Kong inhabitants touched base to post standards and different messages in help of maintenance. 

There were about 150,000 nostalgic guests to the Pier and harbor crossing the evening of 11 November 2006. To check the exceptional event, Star Ferry facilitated a "last ride" before the wharf was shut down, with the last four ships leaving this dock on the stroke of midnight. Eighteen hundred Hongkongers enthusiastically paid up $88 (multiple times the typical admission) for the last ride, whose returns were assigned for philanthropy. 

On 19 November 2006, the Civic Party, Democratic Party, Harbor-front Enhancement Committee, Hong Kong Institute of Architects, People's Sustainable Development Committee, Clear the Air, and Earth Care together met to ask general society to battle for the conservation of the wharf. More than 1,000 marks were gathered on that one day alone, in an appeal to be submitted to Chief Executive Donald Tsang and other senior authorities. Moreover, a gathering of dissenters started a tranquil sit-in that day. So Sau Chung, veteran campaigner (presently a priest), whose hunger strike against Star Ferry charge increments set off the uproars in 1966, stopped by to loan his help. 

Further impelled by the beginning of destruction on the evening of 12 December 2006, additional nonconformists began assembling immediately after laborers evacuated the ringer and the clock face from the pinnacle, leaving a major gap. Activists, including "Long Hair" Leung Kwok-hung, hurried into and involved piece of the obliteration site, reciting trademarks from the top of an excavator and requested to meet Secretary for Housing, Planning and Lands, Michael Suen Ming-yeung. Dissenters framed a human chain at the passageway of the building site in order to attempt to stop the development team and machines from further destroying the site. 

Notwithstanding general society, Civic Party lawmakers, and Choy So-yuk, a councilor from the professional government Democratic Alliance for the Betterment of Hong Kong, appeared at loan support. 

The pulverization drew across the board judgment from the general population, officials, and progressives, every one of whom asserted the administration activity was in opposition to the desires of people in general. Legco individuals postponed plans to promptly stop the destruction, pending further conference. The Government denied a very late relief, emphasizing that there has been "satisfactory discussion", and continued onward with destruction. The Conservancy Association asserted it made its protest known in 1996 when Government proposed to develop a transitory street through the Edinburgh Place and that the Government has never counseled the open with respect to devastation of the wharf, or the neighboring Queen's Pier. 

After the destruction of the dock, the legislature said that it would think about the recollections of the residents and not the memorable estimation of the structure/structure before decimating it. 

Preservationists pledged to take the battle to Queen's Pier, and various other recorded locales compromised with a comparative destiny. Toward the finish of 2006, in a demonstration of how the challenges have inspired an emotional response with general society, the Ferry dissidents were casted a ballot "Individual of the Year" by RTHK Radio 3. Neighborhood Action, the gathering of rather youthful social and media activists which shaped the center of the development, were to later impact social developments, in Hong Kong just as in the terrain: some portion of the more aggressor "post 80s" age, they are incredulous of government business plot, an uneven advancement approach, Hong Kong's subordinate status inside China and the apparent absence of majority rules system in the domain, and have been associated with the battle for genuine political change in Hong Kong, and against the Express Rail connect to Guangzhou.