I Love Bees 

I Love Bees (otherwise called ilovebees or ILB for short) was an other reality diversion (ARG) that filled in as both a certifiable encounter and viral promoting effort for the arrival of designer Bungie's 2004 computer game "Radiance 2". The diversion was made and created by 42 Entertainment. A considerable lot of a similar faculty had recently made an ARG for the film "A.I." titled "The Beast". "I Love Bees" was authorized by Microsoft, "Radiance 2's" distributer. 

"I Love Bees" was first publicized by a concealed message in a "Radiance 2" trailer; players who researched the main site found that the pages seemed, by all accounts, to be hacked by a baffling insight. As players settled riddles, sound logs were presented on the ilovebees.com site which bit by bit uncovered a greater amount of the anecdotal back-story, including a marooned man-made reasoning stranded on Earth and its endeavors to assemble itself back. 

250,000 individuals saw the ilovebees site when it was propelled in August 2004, and more than 500,000 came back to the site each time the pages were refreshed. In excess of three million guests saw the site through the span of a quarter of a year, and a huge number of individuals around the globe partook in the diversion. "I Love Bees" won various honors for its advancement and helped bring forth various other interchange reality recreations for computer games. 

Exchange reality diversions or ARGs are intended to include enthusiasts of computer games or other media in a type of viral advertising which CNET depicted as enveloping "genuine fortune chasing, intuitive narrating, computer games and online [communities]". "I Love Bees" started when containers of nectar were gotten via the post office by individuals who had recently taken an interest in interchange reality diversions. The containers contained letters prompting the I Love Bees site and a commencement. At around a similar time, showy trailers for "Radiance 2" closed with the Xbox logo and a URL, Xbox.com, that immediately flashed a connection to ilovebees.com, apparently a hacked site identified with beekeeping. 

The two occasions, not associated freely for a little while, caused the inquisitive to visit the site ilovebees.com. The site, which gave off an impression of being devoted to nectar deals and beekeeping, was canvassed in befuddling irregular characters and sentence sections. Dana, the apparent website admin of the ilovebees webpage, made a weblog expressing that something had turned out badly with her site, and the webpage itself had been hacked. Suspecting this was a secret that could be disentangled, "Corona" and ARG fans spread the connection and started to chip away at making sense of what was happening. 

The ongoing interaction of "I Love Bees" entrusted players around the globe to cooperate to take care of issues, with almost no course or direction. For instance, the diversion gave players 210 sets of worldwide situating framework organizes and time codes, without any signs to what the areas alluded to. Players in the end made sense of the directions alluded to pay telephones and the occasions to when the telephones would ring; one player in Florida remained by a telephone while Hurricane Frances was minutes away so as to discuss answers to prerecorded inquiries. Other telephone calls were made by live people known as "administrators"; these calls enabled players to cooperate with the characters of the diversions in unconstrained and once in a while diverting ways. Different players treated the undermined information on ilovebees.com as encoded records to decode, or utilized picture documents found on the web server to illuminate perplexes. After players finished certain errands, they were remunerated with new portions to a sound show which uncovered the explanations behind the ilovebees.com glitch. 

After some time, the amusement's components for reaching players developed progressively intricate. Players were sent messages by means of email, approached their mobile phones, and ventured out to masterminded gatherings among players and characters. The amusement finished by welcoming players of the diversion to visit one of four films where they could get an opportunity to play "Radiance 2" preceding its discharge and gather a memorial DVD. 

The amusement's plot starts with a military spaceship colliding with Earth in an obscure area, leaving the specialty's controlling man-made consciousness or AI harmed. This AI, known as the "Administrator" or "Melissa" (from the Latin for "exceptionally sweet," etymologically much the same as Latin "melis", "nectar"), isn't the only one; other AI programs share its framework. With an end goal to endure and contact any enduring partners, Melissa exchanges herself to a San Francisco-zone web server, which happens to have a honey bee fan site known as "I Love Bees". To the misery of Dana Awbrey, the site's maintainer, Melissa's endeavors to send signals started to seem to a great extent as codes, covered up in pictures or other content, meddling with the task of the "I Love Bees" site and debasing a significant part of the substance. 

Dana, endeavoring to recover authority over the tainted site, coincidentally deletes information which contains some portion of Melissa's memory. Enraged, Melissa lashes out at the website admin, acquiring photos of her utilizing the webcam on her PC and promising to deliver retribution. Frightened, Dana reports that she is expelling herself from the circumstance and is taking a recently arranged trek to China sooner than anticipated. 

All AI units contain a program called SPDR, short for System Peril Distributed Reflex. As SPDR endeavors to fix Melissa, irregular dumps from Melissa's memory started to spill into the site, to a great extent specifying Melissa's history and uncovering the nearness of a malignant Trojan-horse infection known as the "Devout Flea." The Spider attempts to eradicate the Flea however is outmaneuvered, as Melissa deletes the Spider rather than the Flea. The Flea keeps on overwriting Melissa's modifying with its very own baffling objectives, with it inevitably being uncovered that it is really an undercover work AI all the more appropriately called the Seeker, worked by the Covenant. 

With the help of different characters uncovered by sound parts, the anecdotal heroes break into a protected army base and figure out how to deactivate a Forerunner gadget which is suggested to start the terminating grouping of the "Radiance" establishments. Be that as it may, the cost paid for the deactivation is a ground-breaking vitality transmission alarming the Covenant to the area of Earth. Entire once more, Melissa perceives how she has been controlled by the Pious Flea, and comes back to her time. "I Love Bees" closes with the Covenant attacking Earth, relating to a noteworthy plot point in "Radiance 2". 

Because of Bungie's promise to the advancement of "Radiance 2" amid "I Love Bees" run, they were unfit to help 42 Entertainment with story creation, thus the ARG's story is just extraneously identified with the principle "Corona" storyline. The occasions of "I Love Bees" were, in this manner, initially not viewed as "Radiance" ordinance. In a 2006 meeting, in any case, Bungie's substance administrator Frank O'Connor explicitly affirmed that "I Love Bees" is a piece of "things that we hold onto as standard." References to components of "I Love Bees" have since showed up in the 2006 Halo Graphic Novel and the 2009 Halo Encyclopedia, the two of which are legitimate group. 

"I Love Bees" designer, 42 Entertainment, was established by Jordan Weisman, the previous imaginative chief for Microsoft's Xbox division. 42 Entertainment had recently made the first ARG, "The Beast", which had been utilized to advance the motion picture "A.I.". Different individuals from the "I Love Bees" group included Sean Stewart, a World Fantasy Award-grant winning writer who filled in as "I Love Bees" author, and Jim Stewartson, "I Love Bees" specialized lead who created the principal business 3D diversion conveyed by the web. Weisman expressed that the objective of "I Love Bees" was to use each individual who associated with the diversion, and to utilize any electronic asset to do as such: "In the event that we could make your toaster print something we would. Anything with an electric flow going through it. A solitary story, a solitary gaming background, without any limits. An amusement such is reality itself." 

42 Entertainment considered "I Love Bees" as a radio dramatization, and utilized the compensation telephones as an approach to energize players. Chris Di Cesare, Microsoft's executive of showcasing, expressed that the radio dramatization's similitudes with "War of the Worlds" was deliberate, and that "["ILB"] stays consistent with the radio dramatization custom of Orson Welles that we were shooting for and furthermore enabled us to recount to the story in an irregular way." In request to avoid non-players from being frightened by the hints of gunfire from the compensation telephones, 42 Entertainment set up passwords that must be rehashed. Stewart depicted composition for the amusement as more agreeable than composing printed fiction, both for the cash and the special experience of ARGs instead of other media: 

The groups of onlookers that we worked for those battles are having an alternate encounter. They're having an aggregate involvement in which they truly bring diverse pieces, one to the following, swap them forward and backward, tattle about them. They have a component of cocreation and a shared nature that doesn't generally have a simple that I've had the capacity to consider in human expressions. 

"I Love Bees" is attributed with helping drive regard for "Radiance 2"; previous "Electronic Gaming Monthly" proofreader Dan Hsu expressed in a meeting that ""I Love Bees" truly got existing gamers and different customers discussing the universe of [Halo]." Billy Pidgeon, a diversion investigator, noticed that "I Love Bees" accomplished what it had been intended to do: "This sort of viral guerrilla advertising worked ... Everybody began texting about it and looking at the site." "I Love Bees" got inclusion from gaming distributions, however pulled in prevailing media consideration too. At its stature, ilovebees got somewhere in the range of two and three million exceptional guests through the span of a quarter of a year. 9,000 individuals additionally effectively took part in reality parts of the amusement. The players of "I Love Bees" themselves were very fluctuated. The objective statistic for the advancement was more youthful guys, yet one player noticed that even moderately aged people were occupied with the diversion. 

"I Love Bees" got a few honors for its advancement. The plan group was one of the beneficiaries of the Innovation Award at the fifth yearly Game Developers Choice Awards. I Love Bees was additionally declared as the champ of a Webby Award in the Game-Related class, introduced by the International Academy of Digital Arts and Sciences. 

Alongside 42 Entertainment's past ARG known as "The Beast", "I Love Bees" is attributed with pointing out more prominent the juvenile advertising structure; "I Love Bees" not just alleviated feelings of dread by advertisers about the expenses of ARG disappointment, however pulled in enthusiasm from other diversion designers in utilizing substitute reality recreations to advance their very own items. Before "I Love Bees", "The Guardian" expressed that "ARGs were bound to join Letsbuyit.com and Barcode Battlers in the e-dustbin of pleasant thoughts that never truly got on"; the blast of broadband web get to and a recharged enthusiasm for codes permitted "I Love Bees" to turn out to be uncontrollably fruitful. Bungie would later utilize another ARG called "Iris" to advance "Radiance 2"s continuation, "Corona 3". 

"I Love Bees" likewise pulled in consideration in the more extensive exchange of client based promoting and participation. Creator Charles Leadbeater contended that "I Love Bees" was a case of "We-Think" aggregate reasoning; Leadbeater noticed that after the "manikin experts" started the amusement, "I Love Bees" "showed every one of the qualities of a mass development, impelled into reality in merely weeks essentially by aggregate energy guided by a couple of the internet 'symbols'". The diversion demonstrated fruitful with gamers, just as pulling in nontraditional players who had no involvement with "Radiance" before joining the amusement. 

. In a 2016 Bandcamp talk with, craftsman Ramona Andra Xavier, known for spearheading the Vaporwave melodic sort under the nom de plume (among others), professed to be intensely impacted by ""I Love Bees"," in its utilization of "hacked" sites, web networks and IRL errands to obscure the lines among the real world and fiction.