Cash No Enough 

Cash No Enough () is a 1998 Singaporean parody film around three companions with monetary issues who begin a vehicle cleaning business together. Unique story by J P Tan and composed by Jack Neo, coordinated by Tay Teck Lock and delivered by JSP Films, the motion picture stars Neo, Mark Lee and Henry Thia. Discharged in films on 7 May 1998 and Money No Enough gotten blended surveys from pundits, however earned over S$5.8 million and was the record-breaking most astounding netting Singaporean film until 2012. Its prosperity restored the Singaporean film industry and make ready for the development of other Singaporean social marvels. 

It was trailed by a continuation, "Cash No Enough 2". 

The plot rotates around the lives of three dear companions: Keong (Jack Neo), a squanderer desk laborer, Ong (Mark Lee), a general contractual worker, and Hui (Henry Thia), a kopi tiam server. After a contention with his supervisor (Chen Zhao Jin), Keong leaves his place of employment and is unfit to get another because of his poor direction of English, absence of scholarly capabilities and PC lack of education. With bills (particularly portions) to pay and a family to help, he strays intensely into the red whereupon his better half abandons him, taking their little girl with her. Ong obtains S$40,000 from credit sharks, and plans to reimburse them in the wake of gathering an obligation owed him by a companion who in this manner flees. The credit sharks beat up Ong for not reimbursing the advance inside the fourteen day due date, so he escapes to Johor Bahru. Hui, who is single and lives with his old mother, squanders his small pay on 4D and seeking after a protection operator who he really likes. 

While trying to determine their money related issues, the three companions choose to begin a vehicle cleaning business together with the restricted capital they have. Be that as it may, at the opening service of their business, Hui's mom falls and is taken to clinic, where she is determined to have leukemia. Hui has three well off more established sisters, yet they will not help pay the hospital expenses, and his application for money related help is rejected in view of his sisters' high earnings. To compound issues, the credit sharks appear at the organization to badger Ong. Ong and Hui request to money out their offers so they can pay the credit sharks and doctor's visit expenses separately, yet the entirety of their cash has just been spent on gear and different business running expenses. Hui's mom at that point kicks the bucket and at her wake, which raises ten thousand dollars of 'bai jin' (commitments toward burial service costs). The advance sharks turn up, seek after Ong and are captured after an extensive police pursue. Keong persuades his significant other and girl to enter an obstruction race where they win the main prize of S$100,000, which he uses to pay his loan bosses, and his family is brought together. The vehicle cleaning business is effective, and the three companions proceed to turn into the executives of Autoglym Singapore. 

During the 1990s, Neo, Lee and Thia turned out to be outstanding in Singapore for their exhibitions in the Channel 8 network show "Satire Night" (Wade-Giles: Kao hsiao hsin tung). Neo at that point acted in the 1997 Eric Khoo film "12 Stories", and saw potential in the then for all intents and purposes nonexistent nearby film industry. He composed a screenplay about ostracizes in the promoting business, yet chose the idea would not interest most Singaporeans, so he thought of composing an anecdote about Ah Bengs (uneducated Chinese men), drawing on the modest foundations of Lee, Thia and himself. Roused, he reached Tay Teck Lock, a previous maker for Channel 8, and recommended they team up. They settled on a plot around three Singaporean men confronting budgetary troubles. Neo went through eight months composing the content, while Tay built up the characters and jokes. In spite of the Speak Mandarin Campaign, Neo utilized Hokkien discourse to "reflect reality" and "contact an alternate gathering of people". 

"Cash No Enough" was delivered by JSP Films on a financial plan of S$850,000. The creation team included Deri Ng as first right hand chief, J.P. Tan as maker, Kamis as cinematographer, A. Supranamian as movie editorial manager, Anthony Ng as workmanship executive and Abdul Shukar Mohd as sound architect. Recording was tormented by money related issues, for example, low quality shooting hardware. After the Board of Film Censors surveyed and affirmed "Cash No Enough", merchant Shaw Organization discharged the film on 21 screens on 7 May 1998. The achievement of the motion picture prompted a question among Neo and Producer over their offers of the benefits. To stamp its tenth commemoration, "Cash No Enough" was discharged in films again and was trailed by a continuation, "Cash No Enough 2". 

"Cash No Enough" earned S$50,000 from sneak reviews and S$42,000 on its opening day, at that point beat the neighborhood film industry for a month. Altogether, the film made S$5.8 million, which remained the best film industry appearing by a neighborhood motion picture until the record was broken by "Ah Boys to Men" in 2012. After its film industry run, 70,000 VCDs of "Cash No Enough" were sold, which remains a record for a Singaporean film. Its prosperity started the movie vocation of Jack Neo, who won the Best Director Award at the 1998 Silver Screen Awards, and the improvement of the Singaporean movie industry. Four progressively Singaporean motion pictures were delivered in 1998, two of which were portrayed by pundits as copycats of "Cash No Enough". With its utilization of Hokkien and unrefined depiction of Singaporean life, the film is likewise credited with making ready for other Singaporean social marvels, for example, mrbrown and TalkingCock. 

The motion picture got a blended basic gathering with LoveHKFilm.com lauding the film as "a compelling parody of...Singaporean culture" and noticed that the performers "complete a sound occupation speaking to characters from Singapore's fluctuating social strata", while an "Assortment" audit depicted the motion picture as "at first new and entertaining at the end of the day too one-note and neighborhood in its cleverness to go far". Francis Dass of the "New Straits Times" composed that "Cash No Enough" was "right on the money" and "interesting", yet censured the "clichăšd content and the chief's affinity for acting".