Geilo Airport, Dagali 

Geilo Airport, Dagali (; earlier ; ) is a private airplane terminal situated at Dagali in Hol, Norway. It was beforehand an open airplane terminal that was both a local air terminal and served worldwide vacationer sanction aircrafts serving the adjacent ski resorts fixated on Geilo. The airplane terminal opened in 1985, yet bombed economically and was inevitably shut in 2003. 

Initially highlighting a runway, it was stretched out to in 1988. Presently it is constrained to which can even now be utilized for private air ship. The air terminal has been changed over to a go truck track, however there is still some broad flight at the airplane terminal. The business administrations have been moved to Fagernes Airport, Leirin, which opened in 1987. The air terminal is possessed and worked by an organization claimed by the regions of Hol and Nore og Uvdal. 

Geilo Airport was opened in 1985 as a provincial airplane terminal. On 20 June 1986, Coast Aero Center was granted the concession for flying from Stavanger to Geilo Airport, Dagali until 1991. The aircraft utilized a Beechcraft 200 Super King Air on the administration. In the meantime, Norving began activities to Oslo. The ridership from Geilo ended up being deficient to make a benefit, and both Coast Aero Center and Norving ended their courses. Wideră¸e and Norsk Air said there was insufficient ridership for them to be intrigued. In 1989, Coast Air got a one-year admission to work from Geilo to Oslo and Stavanger. The organization utilized de Havilland Canada DHC-6 Twin Otter flying machine. The administration was before long constrained to two round treks every week. 

Development of a runway extension from was begun in 1988, enabling the airplane terminal to be served by fly flying machine in universal contract traffic. The 15.3 million Norwegian krone (NOK) venture was financed through a civil and region ensured advance. Since 1984, the proprietors had trusted that the air terminal would turn out to be a piece of a state financing plan that verified the two assurances for the activity of the air terminal, just as endowments to booked traffic. Geilo never gotten such status, dissimilar to the close-by Fagernes Airport, Leirin which opened in 1987. By 1992, the civic chairmen of Hol and Nore og Uvdal, the districts who possessed the air terminal, conceded that it had been a slip-up to manufacture the air terminal. There were under 1,000 travelers every year, and the booked traffic with Coast Air cost the districts NOK 1 million every year. Also came the working shortage of the airplane terminal itself. The organization Norcharter had been made by Hol and Nore og Uvdal, alongside private financial specialists, however it neglected to build ridership, in spite of spending NOK 8 million on promoting the area and the airplane terminal. 

Twenty-six municipally-claimed airplane terminals were taken over by the Norwegian Civil Aviation Administration (presently Avinor) on 1 January 1996. Geilo Airport was not among these, yet got a NOK 1.5 million yearly concede from the state. Following Norway's entrance into the Schengen Agreement in 2000, more cash must be put resources into the air terminal to modify it to meet migration necessities. The air terminal set another record with 8,870 travelers in 2002. From 1 June 2003, another organization, Geilo Lufthavn Drift A/S, made a consent to assume control over activities of the air terminal. Yet, the airplane terminal was transiently shut from April to September, and the new organization decided to not revive the air terminal a while later. The air terminal has since been transformed into a go truck track, however private flying machine can utilization of the runway.