Keepsake Mori (The X-Files) 

"Keepsake Mori" is the fourteenth scene of the fourth period of the American sci-fi TV arrangement "The X-Files". It debuted on the Fox organize on . It was coordinated by Rob Bowman, and composed by arrangement maker Chris Carter, Vince Gilligan, John Shiban and Frank Spotnitz. "Keepsake Mori" included visitor appearances by Sheila Larken, David Lovgren and Morris Panych. The scene investigated the general folklore, or anecdotal history of "The X-Files". "Token Mori" earned a Nielsen family unit rating of 15.5, being viewed by 19.1 million individuals in its underlying communicate. The title deciphers from Latin as "recollect that you will bite the dust." 

The show fixates on FBI specialists Fox Mulder (David Duchovny) and Dana Scully (Gillian Anderson) who deal with cases connected to the paranormal, called X-Files. At the point when Scully is determined to have an inoperable nasopharyngeal tumor, Mulder endeavors to find the end result for her amid her snatching knowledge, trusting the two occasions to be connected. 

"Keepsake Mori" was written in just two days, when past arrangement author Darin Morgan did not contribute a content for the season. Exchange between the composition staff prompted the "mandatory" choice to have Scully determined to have malignant growth, in spite of the fact that the choice was not consistent. Visitor performer Lovgren depicted various clones of his character utilizing after generation strategies to combine a few shots; while on-screen character Pat Skipper had a scene cut from the last scene for time limitations, later showing up in the season finale. 

Dana Scully (Gillian Anderson) discovers that she has a destructive tumor between her sinus and cerebrum. She at first tells just Fox Mulder (David Duchovny) and Walter Skinner (Mitch Pileggi) of the analysis, and is resolved to keep on working. The operators head to Allentown, Pennsylvania to see Betsy Hagopian, a Mutual UFO Network part who was recently found to experience the ill effects of comparative manifestations. The operators discover that Betsy has kicked the bucket, yet discover somebody utilizing her telephone line. They follow the call to Kurt Crawford (David Lovgren), an individual MUFON part. Crawford discloses to them that everything except one of the MUFON individuals Scully recently met have passed on of malignancy. Scully is doubtful of Mulder and Crawford's cases that an administration intrigue and her kidnapping are behind her ailment. 

Scully visits the last enduring MUFON part, Penny Northern, who is being treated for malignant growth at a restorative focus. In the mean time, Mulder finds that all the abductees were childless yet had been treated at a close-by richness facility. At the point when Mulder is summoned by Scully, a professional killer, the Gray-Haired Man (Morris Panych) arrives and executes Crawford with a stiletto weapon, uncovering him to be an outsider human half and half. In the wake of gathering Penny's doctor, Dr. Scanlon, Scully chooses to start chemotherapy. Mulder sneaks into the center and discovers Crawford there, apparently alive. Mulder and "Crawford" hack into the facility's PC database and discover data uncovering Scully has a record there. Mulder sees Skinner and requests to manage The Smoking Man to spare Scully, however Skinner persuades him not to do as such. 

Mulder initiates The Lone Gunmen to enable him to break into a high security explore office where he supposes he might most likely discover more data on the most proficient method to spare Scully. In the mean time, Skinner attempts to manage The Smoking Man for Scully's life, who reveals to him he will hit him up. Inside the office, Mulder finds that Dr. Scanlon works close by a few clones of Kurt Crawford. The clones demonstrate to him Scully's reaped ova and disclose to him they are endeavoring to spare the snatched ladies' lives, since they went about as their introduction to the world moms. They additionally would like to subvert the colonization venture as an inside activity. Mulder takes Scully's ova and leaves, being sought after by the Gray-Haired Man as he get away. He comes back to the clinic to see Scully, who reveals to him that Penny has passed on yet that she plans to battle the ailment. Thereafter, Mulder telephones Skinner to tell him that Scully is doing alright and may come back to work soon, just as saying thanks to him for his recommendation about not consulting with the Smoking Man. Skinner and the Smoking Man later settle on their arrangement in confinement. 

The show's makers chose to give Gillian Anderson's character Dana Scully malignancy from the get-go in the fourth season. Arrangement maker Chris Carter at first talked about giving Scully's mom malignant growth yet chose to have Scully experience the ill effects of it. Carter felt the move would give the demonstrate an intriguing stage on which to talk about things, for example, confidence, science, human services and a specific component of the paranormal. A portion of the composition staff felt that the choice was a poor one to make, refering to it as "a shoddy TV thing". In any case, Frank Spotnitz felt that, given the appearances of malignant growth stricken abductees in past scenes, it was a "required" move to have Scully go with the same pattern. 

The scene was composed by Vince Gilligan, John Shiban, and Frank Spotnitz three days after another content thought failed to work out. Spotnitz noticed that "Darin Morgan had left the show however would contribute a scene. What's more, we understood at the eleventh hour that it wasn't going to occur, and we were screwed over thanks to nothing. John, Vince and I broke that story in perhaps two days. We split up the demonstrations, composed it in presumably an additional two days, and gave the group something to prepare before Christmas break. That was the most exceedingly awful ever." Carter wound up reworking the content over the occasion. The underlying cut wound up being excessively long, bringing about a scene presenting Scully's more seasoned sibling Bill Scully, played by Pat Skipper, being evacuated. The character, still played by Skipper, would inevitably show up in the fourth-season finale "Gethsemane". The scene which would have set up the character was expected to resound a comparative scene in the second season scene "One Breath", which highlighted Don S. Davis as Scully's dad. The two scenes included the performers remaining over a recumbent Scully, wearing white United States Navy dress garbs. Additionally erased from the scene was a kiss among Mulder and Scully, which would have been the first in the arrangement's run. This was a slapped together on Anderson and Duchovny's part, and was expelled from the scene as it was something Chris Carter felt he needed to utilize in the arrangement's film adjustment. Such a kiss was in the long run conceded to season six's "Triangle". 

The scene's opening scene, highlighting a camera moving gradually towards Scully in a brutal white light, was accomplished by building a long thin set shrouded in aluminum foil, which intensified the light being utilized and minimized any hues. This shot was depleted of shading totally, and was joined with a progression of obscuring and confining impacts in after generation to additionally improve the expected image—to make the impression of waking from a fantasy. 

A scene highlighting numerous clones of the character Kurt Crawford was accomplished with movement control photography, permitting on-screen character David Lovgren to depict the majority of the clones—multiple takes were recorded with the performing artist in various positions inside the scene, and by utilizing a camera constrained by a PC to pursue the very same movements for each take, these could be consistently composited together. Maker Paul Rabwin has noticed that accomplishing these shots was troublesome because of the blend of green and blue light sources in the scene. 

"Token Mori" debuted on the Fox organize on , and was first communicated in the United Kingdom on BBC Two on . The scene earned a Nielsen family unit rating of 11.5 with a 17 share, implying that generally of all TV prepared families, and of families sitting in front of the TV, were checked out the scene. A sum of watchers watched this scene amid its unique airing. 

Composing for "The A.V. Club", Todd VanDerWerff appraised the scene an A, calling it "a periodically wonderful, once in a while frequenting, regularly overwritten story". He felt that the scene took the exceptional course of integrating a few beforehand referenced parts of the arrangement's folklore, making it "simple to trust the pieces may meet up now". In any case, VanDerWerff likewise noticed that the scene's two fundamental plot threads—Scully's malignancy and Mulder's investigation—seemed "cumbersomely joined" together, and did not investigate the topic of living with the dread of death just as the past scene, "Never Again", had done. Forthcoming Spotnitz lauded the scene, saying, "I feel that was the best folklore scene we at any point did. It's my most loved one". Chris Carter has expressed that he feels "Keepsake Mori" positions "among the best folklore scenes of each of the nine seasons". 

This scene was submitted to the Academy of Television Arts and Sciences to speak to "The X-Files" in that year's Primetime Emmy Awards. Scene authors Chris Carter, Vince Gilligan, John Shiban, and Frank Spotnitz were selected for a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Writing for a Drama Series. Craftsmanship executives Graeme Murray and Gary Allen and set decorator Shirley Inget won the Creative Emmy Award for Best Art Direction in a Series, while on-screen character Gillian Anderson additionally won the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Drama Series for her work in this scene and the fourth season all in all.