James &quot;Honest Dick&quot; Tate 

James William "Fair Dick" Tate (January 2, 1831 – obscure) was the Kentucky State Treasurer. He was nicknamed "Legitimate Dick" due to his great notoriety and compatibility with his partners. The epithet turned amusing, notwithstanding, when Tate fled with almost a fourth of a million dollars from the state's treasury in 1888. He was never found. 

Tate's robbery was much of the time refered to amid Kentucky's fourth sacred show as motivation to force term restrains on Kentucky's chosen authorities. The one-term limit stayed in power on the vast majority of Kentucky's authorities until the state's constitution was revised in 1992 to permit the Governor, Lieutenant Governor, State Treasurer and other state officeholders to serve two continuous terms. 

James William Tate was brought into the world the single offspring of Nancy (Taylor) Tate and her second spouse, Colonel Thomas L. Tate in Franklin County, Kentucky. His dad was slid from a Virginia group of Scots-Irish parentage. His dad was a rancher and a veteran of the War of 1812, and his fatherly granddad was a veteran of the American Revolutionary War. His maternal granddad was Reverend John Taylor, a pioneer Baptist serve in Kentucky. 

Tate got his training in Franklin and Woodford regions and completed his tutoring in 1848. Soon thereafter, at age 17, Tate started function as an assistant at the Frankfort post office. On 3 June 1856, he wedded Lucy Hawkins. On 28 June 1858, the couple had their first youngster, a child named Howard, who kicked the bucket at three years old. The couple additionally had a little girl, Edmonia. 

Tate's political profession started with an arrangement by Governor Lazarus W. Powell to the situation of Assistant Secretary of State for the territory of Kentucky in 1854. A model Democrat, he surrendered the post when Know-Nothing Governor Charles S. Morehead was chosen in 1855. After four years, he was named to the post again under Democratic Governor Beriah Magoffin, and upheld the Breckinridge wing of Kentucky's Democratic gathering amid the American Civil War. Despite the fact that Magoffin surrendered in 1862 because of conflicts with the General Assembly, Tate kept on serving under Magoffin's hand-picked successor, James F. Robinson, leaving again toward the finish of Robinson's term in 1863. From 1865–7, Tate filled in as Assistant Clerk to the Kentucky House of Representatives. Toward the finish of his administration in the house, Tate effectively kept running for state treasurer, a post to which he would be re-chosen like clockwork for the following two decades. 

In 1878, Tate was referenced in the "True to life Encyclopedia of Kentucky". The biographer spouted that in 1867, Tate had "tangibly contributed, by his own fame, to the incredible achievement of the Democratic party" including: 

Biennially, since that time, without restriction in his very own gathering, he has been progressively re-chosen by well known greater parts, maybe surpassing those gotten by some other possibility for office in the State. From these confirmations of prevalence, no doubt his rent on the workplace may be viewed as a fixed reality. 

In the gubernatorial race of 1887, Republican challenger William O. Bradley made an issue of the need to analyze the treasury. In spite of the fact that Bradley at last lost the race, the possibility of examining the treasurer's records flourished, and the General Assembly started requiring a commission to embrace the review in the 1887–8 session. Tate professed to require time to get his books all together; this adequately deferred the foundation of the commission, yet it was at last shaped. 

In the principal quarter of 1888, Tate started an example of conduct that would have excited significant doubt in a man of lesser notoriety. He started storing just checks in the state's financial balance, rather than money, as was normal. In a brief timeframe, he paid various individual obligations. On 14 March 1888, Henry Murray, one of Tate's assistants, saw him filling two tobacco sacks with gold and silver coins later resolved to be worth about $100,000. He left for Louisville, leaving a note saying he would return in two days. Once more, because of the idea of his activity and his apparent record of reliability, no one discovered his activities flawed. Following seven days go with no word from Tate, it turned out to be clear what had occurred. Records would later demonstrate that, following a couple of days in Louisville, Tate loaded up a train for Cincinnati, and afterward disappeared, leaving his better half and little girl behind. 

Amid the examination that pursued, the state's record, which was practically garbled, was found to demonstrate Tate giving some state authorities credits that were ordinarily left unpaid and progresses on their pay rates, including a development of a few thousand dollars to Governor Preston H. Leslie in 1872. Tate had evidently utilized a portion of the state's cash to make individual interests in mines and land. Senator Simon B. Buckner reported that between his appalling accounting, his theft and his inside and out robbery, Tate had abused $247,128.50 (about $7,000,000 2017 dollars) from the state's treasury. 

Reprimand hearings followed in the House of Representatives, and the Senate expelled Tate from office, sentencing him on four tallies. A criminal arraignment pursued. A 1895 case checked "Not to be formally announced" liberated those involved in the outrage from any commitment to reimburse the state. "Tateism" wound up synonymous with political debasement in the state, and Tate's wrongdoing was every now and again refered to at the state's fourth sacred show in 1891. The subsequent constitution extended the one-term limit that had connected to the representative since 1800 to all statewide chosen authorities. The assembly and voters received a two-term limit for such authorities in 1992. 

Regardless of the General Assembly's idea of $5,000 for data prompting Tate's capture, he was never found. In spite of the fact that his family at first guaranteed they had heard nothing from Tate and assumed he may have ended it all, his little girl in the long run conceded that she had gotten somewhere around four letters from her dad among April and December 1888. The letters were stamped from British Columbia (Canada), Japan, China, and San Francisco. Another observer professed to have seen a letter to one of Tate's companions written in 1890 and stamped from Brazil. That was the last known correspondence from "Fair Dick" Tate. An article in "The New York Times", refering to "companions who should know", asserted that Tate was accepted to have kicked the bucket in China in 1890.