Trish Stratus 

Patricia Anne Stratigeas (; conceived December 18, 1976) is a Canadian wellness ace, on-screen character, TV character, proficient wrestler, and wellness show. 

In the wake of starting her vocation as a wellness show, Trish Stratus started working for the World Wrestling Federation (WWF), which was later renamed World Wrestling Entertainment (WWE). Right off the bat in her vocation, she was generally engaged with explicitly themed storylines, for example, dealing with the group T and A (Test and Albert, while serving as a slang articulation truncated from "Tits and Ass"), and a kayfabe issue with Vince McMahon's Mr. McMahon character. As Stratus invested more energy in the ring, her apparent wrestling abilities fortified and her notoriety expanded. Along these lines, she was made a one-time WWE Hardcore Champion, three-time "WWE Babe of the Year" and was announced "Diva of the Decade". After about seven years in the business, Stratus resigned from expert wrestling at WWE Unforgiven on September 17, 2006 in the wake of winning her record-setting seventh WWE Women's Championship. In 2011, Stratus was a mentor for "WWE Tough Enough". She was enlisted into the WWE Hall of Fame in 2013 as the most youthful part in its history. In 2018, she came back to WWE, taking an interest in the 2018 Women's Royal Rumble; a tag-group coordinate at WWE Evolution alongside Lita against Mickie James and Alicia Fox; and a 10-lady label coordinate on "WWE Raw" the night after Evolution. 

Beside expert wrestling, Stratus has showed up on various magazine covers and has been engaged with philanthropy work. She has additionally facilitated a few honor and network shows, and claims a yoga studio. 

Stratigeas experienced childhood in Richmond Hill, Ontario, Canada where she went to Bayview Secondary School. She enlisted at York University, where she examined science and kinesiology and played soccer and field hockey. Because of a workforce strike in 1997, she was compelled to change her arrangements. She was filling in as a secretary at a neighborhood rec center when she was drawn closer by the distributer of "MuscleMag International" to complete a test shoot for the magazine. She later showed up on the front of the May 1998 issue and was marked to a two-year contract. For the following a half year, she dealt with her body and showed up on various magazine covers. Amid this time, she joined Big Daddy Donnie and Jeff Marek as the third host of "Live Audio Wrestling" on Toronto Sports Radio, The FAN 590. 

Stratigeas had been a devotee of wrestling since youth and was particularly enamored with wrestlers Hulk Hogan and Randy Savage, among others. Her demonstrating work grabbed the eye of the World Wrestling Federation (WWF). In November 1999, she was marked to a multi-year contract with the organization, who sent her to Sully's Gym where she was prepared by Ron Hutchison. 

Stratigeas made her presentation as a heel on the March 19, 2000 scene of "Sunday Night Heat" under the ring name Trish Stratus. She showed up in front of an audience to scout Test and Prince Albert. The following night on "Crude Is War", Test and Albert united as the label group T and An, and Stratus started her first job in the organization as their valet. It was amid her stretch overseeing T and A that Stratus took her first significant knock in the ring, by being driven through a table by the Dudley Boyz at Backlash, after she had been insulting Bubba Ray Dudley for a little while. In June, she was forced to bear a stink face from Rikishi on "Crude". 

She additionally started overseeing then-heel, Val Venis to win the WWE Intercontinental Championship, however their association finished at SummerSlam after Venis lost the title. 

Stratus made her in-ring debut on the June 22 scene of "SmackDown!", winning a label group coordinate with T and An against the Hardy Boyz and Lita. A storyline fight among Stratus and Lita created after the match with Stratus assaulting Lita on scenes of "Crude" and "SmackDown!". This prompted an Indian Strap coordinate between the two ladies on the July 24 scene of "Crude", which Stratus won with assistance from Stephanie McMahon. She completed the year contending ineffectively for the WWF Women's Championship various occasions, and isolating from Test and Albert when the group disbanded. 

In mid 2001, Stratus wound up engaged with an edge with WWF Chairman Vince McMahon, amid when Vince's better half Linda was kayfabe organized after an interest Vince had made for a separation amid a scene of "SmackDown!". Vince and Stratus' relationship progressively maddened the manager's girl, at that point heel, Stephanie McMahon. On the February 19 scene of "Crude", Stephanie and Trish were booked for a match, yet it rapidly got dropped due to Stephanie getting dazed by Steve Austin. At No Way Out, Stratus and Stephanie squared off, with Stephanie scoring the triumph after a run-in by William Regal. Amidst a label group coordinate that hollowed Vince and Stratus against Regal and Stephanie the following night on "Crude", Stratus was the casualty of a set-up by Vince, Stephanie and Regal. Superb executed his finisher, the "Lofty Cutter", on Stratus and Stephanie then dumped slop over Stratus' body. Vince remained over Stratus, and he disclosed to her she was a "toy" with which he had "become burnt out on playing with". The edge proceeded with the following week on "Crude", with Vince driving Stratus to strip down to her dark bra and underwear in the ring and bark like a canine. The storyline arrived at an end at WrestleMania X-Seven, when Stratus slapped Vince amid his match against his child Shane, turning face all the while. 

Following her first face turn, Stratus started wrestling low maintenance. She collaborated with Lita against then-heels, Stacy Keibler and Torrie Wilson at InVasion. In the wake of enduring a lower leg damage in the mid year, notwithstanding, she was sidelined for the accompanying three months. This hindered her ongoing endeavor into wrestling, yet in addition an on-screen sentiment with Jeff Hardy and sprouting storyline with Team Xtreme. As she restored, she kept herself unmistakable by co-facilitating "Abundance" on TNN. In the wake of returning in harvest time, Stratus showed up at Survivor Series where she won the WWF Women's Championship without precedent for a six-pack challenge. Stratus was next associated with a fight with Jazz over the Women's Championship, where she held the title at the Royal Rumble, yet dropped the title to Jazz two weeks after the fact on the February 4, 2002 scene of "Crude". Stratus at that point endeavored to recapture the title for a while, incorporating contending in a triple risk coordinate at WrestleMania X8 against Lita and Jazz in the place where she grew up of Toronto, Ontario, Canada, however neglected to win the match. While pursuing the Women's Championship, Stratus won the WWE Hardcore Championship on May 6, sticking Crash Holly after Bubba Ray Dudley hit him over the head with a garbage can. She lost the title to Steven Richards soon a short time later be that as it may, because of the stipulation that the belt was to be guarded day in and day out insofar as there was a ref present. Multi week later, she won the Women's Championship for the second time in a label group coordinate with Bubba Ray Dudley. Amid this time, Stratus started wrestling exclusively on the Raw brand in the wake of being drafted in the WWF Brand Extension. 

Stratus' second rule as hero arrived at an end on June 23, when she was vanquished at King of the Ring by Molly Holly. The two Divas proceeded with their storyline quarrel for the following three months. After a fizzled endeavor to win the title in July, Stratus won the title for the third time at Unforgiven. While fighting with Holly, Stratus was additionally associated with an edge with new Diva Victoria, who held a storyline resentment against Stratus, asserting she was deceived by Stratus when the two of them functioned as wellness models. The two contended in a few title matches, with Stratus holding until Survivor Series, where Victoria won the title in a Hardcore match. On March 17, 2003, Victoria and Steven Richards crushed Jazz and Stratus in a label group coordinate when Jazz left Stratus. After the match, Jeff Hardy spared Stratus from an assault by Victoria and Richards and afterward kissed her, subsequent in Stratus turning into Hardy's on-screen sweetheart yet again. The two would talk and kiss behind the stage, contend as an intergender label group, and go to one another's guide when in peril amid singles rivalry. At no time was their past relationship recognized. The storyline was all of a sudden dropped when WWE discharged Hardy in April. This denoted the second time in two years that a sentiment among Stratus and Hardy suddenly finished because of a misfortune in one of their own lives. In neither one of the instances did the edge completely play out or achieve an end. 

At WrestleMania XIX, Stratus finished her quarrel with Victoria by vanquishing her and Jazz to catch her fourth Women's Championship, just to lose the title to Jazz at the accompanying pay-per-see, Backlash. The "Crude" after Backlash, Eric Bischoff requested a No Disqualification coordinate among him and Stratus. In the event that Stratus won, she would get a title rematch the following week; if Bischoff won, he would get the opportunity to go through a night with her. Bischoff would proceed to win the match, however the stipulation was invalidated when Linda McMahon defied him after the match. 

In the next months, Stratus was put into a union with Gail Kim. It was brief, be that as it may, as Kim turned on Stratus and cooperated with Molly Holly, putting the ladies in a storyline fight. The pair vanquished Stratus and a few label group accomplices until Stratus aligned herself with a returning Lita. The group vanquished Kim and Holly in a few matches, including a match at Unforgiven. 

Stratus started an on-screen sentiment with Chris Jericho amid the November 10 scene of "Crude" when she consented to go out on the town with him. Along these lines, they took an interest in an intergender label group coordinate as accomplices on December 1. After the match, Stratus caught Jericho conversing with then-heel, Christian, who was associated with an on-screen sentiment with Lita at the time, about who could lay down with their individual lady first. Multi week later, Stratus and Lita faced the men about their activities, prompting a fight between the two people which brought about a "Skirmish of the Sexes" label group coordinate at Armageddon, which the ladies lost. A rematch the following night finished in a no contest.<ref name="Canoe 12/16/03"></ref> Her association with Jericho proceeded into the following year with another point of Stratus creating affections for Jericho. Christian would likewise quickly turn face by and by, however just uncovered to be a lie as he would assault and thrashing her in a match requested by Eric Bischoff. This would begin a quarrel among Christian and Jericho, who was guarding Stratus. Amid their match at WrestleMania XX, nonetheless, Stratus turned heel by selling out Jericho and favoring Christian. Stratus asserted her purposes behind agreeing with Christian were that he was a "genuine man", and Jericho was an "adoration debilitated young doggie". The pair fought with Jericho for a while and contended in a 2-on-1 Handicap match at Backlash. The group of Stratus and Christian were joined by "issue solver" Tyson Tomko the following night on "Crude". 

Stratus won the WWE Women's Championship for a fifth time at Bad Blood on June 13. She guarded the title until she endured an authentic broken turn in July that made her be out of activity for around a month. Upon her arrival, she kept on guarding the title against various challengers before losing the title to Lita on December 6, when the two ladies wrestled in the headliner of "Crude" for the title. Stratus recovered the title for the 6th time a month later at New Year's Revolution, after Lita endured genuine knee damage amid the match. Stratus was initially reserved to lose the title back to Lita at WrestleMania 21, yet because of Lita's damage, she wasn't cleared to wrestle. Another point was then created among Stratus and 2004 Raw Diva Search victor Christy Hemme over desire of Hemme's "Playboy" magazine presentation, with Stratus assaulting Hemme and shower painting "skank" over her back. Stratus was tested by Hemme, who later uncovered she was being prepared by Lita, for a title coordinate at WrestleMania 21, where Stratus effectively held her title. Stratus would then request a rematch against Hemme the following night on "Crude"; before the match began, Stratus hit Hemme with the "Chick Kick", and re-harmed Lita's knee. The following week, in the wake of losing a label group coordinate, Stratus was pursued around the field by Lita's storyline spouse, Kane, barely getting away. The week after, Stratus nearly got chokeslammed onto the stage, however Viscera spared her. Stratus would then shape a brief coalition with Viscera, who was requested to secure her. 

In May 2005, Stratus was sidelined with the Women's Championship in the wake of enduring a herniated plate, with the storyline clarification that Viscera had harmed her at Backlash after she offended him for losing to Kane. This left the organization without a Women's Champion for four months, as Stratus remained the boss amid the season of her damage, along these lines overlooking the multi day statement expressing that a hero must guard their individual title at any rate once every 30 days. She came back to "Crude" on September 12, 2005 as a face by favoring Ashley Massaro against Vince's Devils (Candice Michelle, Victoria and Torrie Wilson). The quarrel additionally included the appearing Mickie James, who presented herself as Stratus' greatest fan. In November, amid the "Eddie Guerrero Tribute Show", Stratus participated in a between limited time Divas fight imperial that was won by SmackDown! Diva Melina. The following week, MNM (Joey Mercury and Johnny Nitro) abducted Stratus for Melina, who tested a tied up and tape choked Stratus to a counterpart for the Women's Championship. The two battled at Survivor Series, with Stratus crushing Melina.<ref name="WrestleZone 11/27/05"></ref> Stratus and Mickie James kept joining together in late 2005, while James turned out to be progressively fixated on Stratus. On the December 26 scene of "Crude", the storyline among Stratus and James formed into a lesbian one, when James started a close kiss with Stratus under a sprig of mistletoe, making a shocked Stratus escape the storage space. 

The odd connection among Stratus and James proceeded into 2006, with the two Divas going up against one another in a title coordinate at New Year's Revolution, where Stratus rose successful. Regardless of the annihilation, James kept on being enchanted of Stratus which made her vibe awkward, and on March 6, Stratus stood up to James, revealing to her that she required space. The pair quickly accommodated on the March 18 scene of "Saturday Night's Main Event", joining together to vanquish Candice Michelle and Victoria; be that as it may, after the match, James turned on Stratus and assaulted her. A match at WrestleMania 22 saw Stratus lose the Women's Championship to James, finishing her 448-day rule. The match, was and still is, generally perceived as a standout amongst the best ladies' matches in the organization. Amid a rematch at Backlash, Stratus endured a real disjoined shoulder in the wake of taking a knock to the outside of the ring. While she was restoring for about a month and a half, she kept on showing up on-screen. 

Stratus came back to the ring on June 26, where she had a Women's Championship coordinate with Mickie James. Stratus would proceed to lose the match, along these lines at last consummation their nine-month long storyline. On that night, she began a sentimental point with Carlito after he spared her from a twofold group assault by Melina and Johnny Nitro. They contended as a group, and won a blended label group coordinate against Melina and Nitro at "Saturday Night's Main Event" on July 15. As a couple, Stratus and Carlito quickly fought with WWE Champion Edge and Lita (who turned heel) after the pair intruded on Stratus' title coordinate with Mickie James. The two couples contended in a few label group matches, including a six-man label group coordinate where Edge, Lita and Randy Orton vanquished Stratus, Carlito and John Cena after Orton RKO'd Stratus and Lita caught up with the stick. Stratus' keep going match on "Crude" happened on September 11, 2006 where she vanquished previous opponent Mickie James. In late August, Lita expressed that Stratus would resign following Unforgiven, which was later affirmed by Stratus. At Unforgiven on September 17, in the place where she grew up of Toronto, Stratus won against Lita with individual Canadian Bret Hart's mark accommodation move, the Sharpshooter. Her triumph earned her seventh and last Women's Championship, the most in WWE history, and she resigned as the victor. The title was abandoned before long. 

Stratus and Lita showed up on December 10, 2007 amid "Crude's fifteenth Anniversary uncommon", assaulting Jillian Hall. The next year, Stratus showed up on "Crude" in Toronto on May 5, in a behind the stage portion including Ron Simmons and Trevor Murdoch. 

Stratus wrestled her first match in more than two years on the December 22, 2008 scene of "Crude", when she and John Cena crushed Santino Marella and his previous on-screen protăšgăš Beth Phoenix in a blended label group coordinate. On September 14, 2009, Stratus filled in as the visitor master of "Crude", and took an interest in a six-man label group coordinate, cooperating with Montel Vontavious Porter and Mark Henry to overcome Phoenix, Chris Jericho, and Big Show. 

Stratus showed up at the 2011 Elimination Chamber pay-per-view to report that she would be a coach on the recovery of "WWE Tough Enough" and halted LayCool (Layla and Michelle McCool) from assaulting Kelly. The next month, on March 14, she lost a match to Vickie Guerrero because of obstruction from LayCool and Dolph Ziggler. After the match, John Morrison and Raw visitor star Nicole "Snooki" Polizzi went to her guide. At WrestleMania XXVII, Stratus, Snooki, and Morrison vanquished the group of Ziggler and LayCool. The night after WrestleMania, on "Crude", Stratus and Morrison crushed Guerrero and Ziggler. She additionally showed up on "Crude" on June 6 and "SmackDown" on September 16. 

The next year, on July 23, 2012, she showed up on "Raw"s 1000th scene. 

On the January 28, 2013, scene of "Crude", Stratus was reported as a WWE Hall of Fame inductee as a major aspect of the 2013 class, 

Stratus picked Stephanie McMahon to draft her into the Hall of Fame in April. The next year, Stratus drafted Lita into the WWE Hall of Fame. On August 16, 2016, Stratus showed up on WWE Network exceptional "WWE 24: Women's Evolution", examining the historical backdrop of the ladies back in her period known as the Attitude Era and furthermore her contention with Lita. 

On January 22, 2018, amid the "Crude" 25 Years commemoration scene, Stratus was among a gathering of ladies respected as the absolute most noteworthy female whizzes in the quarter century history of the show, alongside The Bella Twins, Maryse, Kelly, Lilian Garcia, Torrie Wilson, Michelle McCool, Terri Runnels, Maria Kanellis, and individual Hall of Famer Jacqueline. After six days, Stratus was an unexpected contestant in the debut all-ladies' Royal Rumble coordinate at the occasion. Stratus entered in the last spot, number 30, and scored three disposals, over Nia Jax, Mickie James and Natalya. Stratus' collaboration with James gathered an impressive group response. Stratus was among the last five ladies in the match, before being disposed of by Sasha Banks. 

On August 18, 2018 it was reported by WWE that she would make her in ring come back to the organization to contend at the Evolution occasion against Alexa Bliss. On the August 27, 2018 scene of "Crude", Stratus showed up intruding on Elias and going up against him for talking down on the place where she grew up, the two traded affronts, coming full circle in Stratus slapping him. Later in the night, Stratus alongside Raw Women's Champion Ronda Rousey and Natalya, were faced Alexa Bliss, Mickie James, and Alicia Fox and Stratus at that point filled in as help alongside Ronda Rousey amid a one on one match among Natalya and Alicia Fox. She was then observed behind the stage amid the show having a portion with Ronda and Natalya just as the returning Bella Twins, Nikki and Brie. On the October eighth scene of WWE RAW, Stratus would cut a promotion against her then rival at WWE Evolution, Alexa Bliss. Joy, alongside Mickie James went to the ring to stand up to Stratus, and moved her to a label coordinate at Evolution. Very quickly, Stratus would report that Lita (who was initially planned to confront James at Evolution) would be her label accomplice. at the Evolution occasion, Trish and Lita vanquished Mickie James and Alicia Fox (supplanted Bliss because of damage). 

Stratus is refered to as motivation for a few ladies, for example, Kia Stevens, Natalya, Melina Perez, Rosa Mendes, Kelly, Michelle McCool, Emma, Taryn Terrell, Shazza McKenzie, 

Maria Kanellis, Alexa Bliss, Carmella, Deonna Purrazzo, Santana Garrett, Sasha Banks, Bayley, and Mandy Rose. 

On June 3, 2006, she facilitated the Canada's Walk of Fame acceptance service and played out a melody and move number enlivened by the from the film "Chicago" at the occasion. Amid the show, Stratus advertisement libbed a kiss with individual Canadian performer Pamela Anderson. 

From late November 2006 to mid-January 2007, Stratus briefly moved to Muncie, Indiana for the CBS unscripted TV drama "Equipped and Famous". She was given a spot in the arrangement after Paul Heyman had referenced her name to CBS. The idea was that she was one of five big names who prepared as volunteer officers with the Muncie Police Department. In the wake of completing her preparation, Stratus and her genuine officer accomplice were chased after by a camera group while going on authentic police calls. Despite the fact that the show was planned to communicate seven scenes beginning on January 10, 2007, CBS dropped the arrangement after only four of the scenes were disclosed. After the undoing of "Equipped and Famous", Stratus facilitated "The Second City's Next Comedy Legend". The challenge was like the style of "America's Next Top Model", with Stratus depicting the "Tyra Banks" job as contact between the competitors and judges. 

Stratus is the host and subject of the show "Stratusphere", which appeared in 2008 on the Travel + Escape TV station. The show pursues Stratus as she visits diverse areas around the globe to take an interest in neighborhood sports and experience. Bill Harris composed that, "Consistently, Stratus leaves on an outing looking for fascinating areas and brave physical difficulties. In the principal scene, for instance, Stratus is in Kochi, India, where she learns the old military craft of kalarippayattu, advancing from battling with sticks to battling with metal swords. Through the 10-scene keep running of Stratusphere, Stratus does everything from reindeer dashing in Norway to bungee bouncing in Bali. Her physicality clearly sets Stratusphere separated from most travel appears." Stratus additionally visitor featured in the Canadian show "Da Kink in My Hair" new season, which began on February 12, 2009. In 2009, Stratus turned into a representative for games wagering site, Sports Interaction. Likewise, she has a YouTube fanpage committed to her which has 378,000 endorsers as of October 8, 2018. 

Stratus featured in the Canadian autonomous motion picture, "Safeguard Enforcers", which denoted her acting introduction. She played an abundance seeker named Jules Taylor, which discharged on April 19, 2011, debuting at ActionFest 2011. The motion picture was then discharged on DVD as "Abundance Hunters". 

Stratus co-featured in the 2015 film, "Gridlocked", as the despicable Gina. 

Stratus has showed up in more WWE videogames than some other female with twenty-five absolute appearances. She made her in-diversion debut in "WWF No Mercy" and shows up in "", "WWF SmackDown! Simply Bring It", "WWF Raw", "WWE WrestleMania X8", "WWE SmackDown! Shut Your Mouth", "WWE Crush Hour", "WWE WrestleMania XIX", "WWE Raw 2", "WWE SmackDown Here Comes the Pain", "WWE Day of Reckoning", "WWE SmackDown! versus Crude", "WWE WrestleMania 21", "WWE Day of Reckoning 2", "WWE SmackDown! versus Crude 2006", "WWE SmackDown versus Crude 2007", "WWE SmackDown versus Crude 2010", "WWE 12" (DLC), "WWE 13", "WWE SuperCard", "WWE Immortals", "WWE 2K16" (DLC), "WWE 2K17", "WWE 2K18" and "WWE 2K19". 

In 2008, Stratus opened a yoga studio named Stratusphere in suburbia of Toronto, Ontario. The studio is charged as "Canada's biggest eco-accommodating yoga studio". In 2009, Stratusphere was granted Top Choice Awards' Best New Business grant, and the next year, Stratus won the honor for Business Woman of the Year. The studio won Top Choice Awards' Best Yoga Studio grant in 2013. 

Stratigeas is of Greek drop and is the oldest girl of John and Alice Stratigeas. Her sisters are named Christie and Melissa. Stratigeas wedded her secondary school sweetheart and beau of fourteen years, Ron Fisico, on September 30, 2006. A few WWE Divas were in participation at the wedding, and her marriage outfit was included on a front of "The present Bride" magazine. Not long after the wedding, Stratus persuaded the call to be a piece of "Equipped and Famous", so she taped the show as opposed to going on her special first night. In 2013, Stratigeas reported her pregnancy at the WWE Hall of Fame service, and her first tyke, a child named Maximus Stratus Fisico, was conceived on September 30, 2013. Stratigeas is closest companions with previous wrestler Amy Dumas, a.k.a. "Lita", notwithstanding naming Dumas as the adoptive parent to her child. In October 2016, Stratigeas declared on Twitter that she was anticipating her second youngster. On December 6, 2016, Lilian Garcia declared on her digital recording that Trish is expecting a child young lady in mid 2017. On January 14, 2017, Trish brought forth child young lady named Madison-Patricia Fisico. 

Stratigeas has additionally been included with various philanthropies, for example, Ronald McDonald House, Dreams Take Flight, and the Special Olympics. From 2001, she was a representative for the World Natural Sports Association. On March 29, 2008, she took part in the Island Triathlon Series as a major aspect of a VIP transfer group to help fund-raise for Dignitas International.