Life saver (Stargate Atlantis) 

"Life saver" is the second scene of the fourth season, and the 62nd scene by and large, of the sci-fi TV arrangement "Stargate Atlantis". The scene previously broadcast in the United States on October 5, 2007 on the Sci Fi Channel, and along these lines circulated October 16 on Sky One in the United Kingdom. It was composed by official maker Carl Binder, and coordinated by Martin Wood. The scene is a continuation of the past scene, "Unfastened", after Colonel Sheppard and his group as they play out a mission to take a Zero Point Module from the Asurans. It was depicted by official maker Joseph Mallozzi as a "major operation eppy." 

The scene was viewed as to some degree a send off to Elizabeth Weir (played by the leaving Torri Higginson). Despite the fact that Wood was credited for coordinating, he was busy with coordinating the motion picture "", so Andy Mikita did a large portion of the real coordinating for the scene. It got marginally lower evaluations than "Loose", yet was still generally welcomed. 

To guarantee the mission to take a Zero Point Module is a triumph, Dr. McKay (David Hewlett) proposes to utilize Dr. Weir (Torri Higginson) and her nanites to get to the Asuran group and guide them; should the Asurans take her over, McKay would initiate an off button on the nanites, which would likewise viably murder Weir. With their test jumper prepared, Sheppard (Joe Flanigan) leaves Teyla (Rachel Luttrell) in direction of Atlantis. The jumper's hyperdrive works and they land over the Asuran homeworld (M7R-227). With Weir's entrance, Sheppard and Ronon (Jason Momoa) effectively take the Zero Point Module. McKay then finds a code that will make the Asurans assault the Wraith and persuades Sheppard to transfer a program to reactivate this lethargic code. 

McKay starts an enemy of Replicator field to shield them from the Asurans, yet Oberoth (David Ogden Stiers) finds this and sends a wave to supersede the field. Weir leaves McKay, stands up to Oberoth and utilizations his capacity to solidify all the Asurans, notwithstanding deceiving him into trusting that he has caught the group, all to purchase Sheppard sufficient opportunity to transfer the program. In any case, Weir battles to keep Asurans solidified, and when Sheppard discovers her similarly as she loses control, she arranges him to desert her as the Asurans unfreeze and catch her. The group escapes without Weir, yet end up caught as they come up short on the ability to make it to hyperspace. They are out of the blue helped by the "Apollo", who have discovered Atlantis with Colonel Carter's (Amanda Tapping) help. The "Apollo" sets down covering fire sufficiently long for the group to arrive in the contender inlet and conveys them back to Atlantis. In any case, the "Apollo" is unfit to bolt onto Doctor Weir and bar her on board. Presently completely controlled, Sheppard sends the city to M35-117, a back-up planet, and makes a harsh landing onto its sea. While the group grieves the loss of Weir, McKay recaptures contact with Stargate Command. Dr. Zelenka (David Nykl) declares that the Asurans have started their assault against the Wraith, which means Weir's penance was not futile. Carter discloses to Sheppard that they will miss Weir, however Sheppard pledges to discover her once more. 

"Help" first surfaced in February 2007. Carl Binder needed to complete a heist scene amid the off-season, however the authors had no clue where it would fit in the general season bend. Be that as it may, as "Unfastened" was composed, they understood their heist story streamed normally from it. Despite the fact that Martin Wood was credited for coordinating the scene, Andy Mikita wound up coordinating the majority of it rather, just as coordinating pieces of "Unfastened"; Wood was coordinating "" at the season of shooting. Amanda Tapping mentioned that showrunners Mallozzi and Mullie not give her a major part for the scene, as she was in the Arctic taping for "Stargate: Continuum". Another reason that Carter's appearance was little was that Torri Higginson was as yet a piece of the show, and the makers needed Carter to be presented gradually. The scene, as a "third part", was hard to compose, since the second part ("Adrift") is a rebound resolve of the initial segment ("First Strike"), and the third part needs to "determine the purpose." In the composition stages, there was additionally talk about whether to spare the trial hyperdrive jumper. In the long run it was concluded that it would be spared, to keep open the likelihood of utilizing it once more. 

Tapping felt following up on the new show went a little simpler when shooting Carter scenes with Bill Dow ("Bill Lee"), with whom she had recently dealt with "Stargate SG-1". She said another factor that made following up on "Atlantis" simpler was the inviting cast and group of the arrangement. Tapping's hair was longer than it was amid her time on "SG-1", and the military affirmed of the change as long as it was worn up. To get a good deal on enhanced visualizations, the group fabricated set pieces to speak to a portion of the structures on M7R-227 and set them before the puddle jumper set. Another measure taken as a substitute to special visualizations was to given emulate craftsmen a role as the solidified Asurans. 

While recording Weir controlling the group to discover the ZPM, the way that she can see "everything" without seeing anything was a hard sell for a performing artist, yet with Higginson's drive in her eyes, this would make the scene increasingly reasonable for the gathering of people. The scene was not written in the first content. The set for the center room in the Asuran city was a similar set as Atlantis' door room, however so as to make it look as changed as could reasonably be expected, the cameras were set at points not generally utilized for recording in the entryway room, for example, where they would typically put lights. 

The scene earned a 1.1 family Nielsen rating, which was somewhere around one-tenth of a point or 8% from "Loose". It fell behind "ECW on Sci Fi" (with a 1.2 rating), "Aha" (with a 1.4 rating) and "Apparition Hunters" (with a 1.5 rating). In the United Kingdom, "Help" got 443,000 watchers, setting "Stargate Atlantis" as number six in the best ten communicates for Sky One for that week, behind "The Simpsons" and "Jail Break". It was decidedly gotten by generally commentators. Tory Ireland Mell of "IGN" appraised the scene a "breathtaking" 10 out of a conceivable 10, adulating the moderate presentation of Carter, as opposed to having a SG-1 colleague constrained into the arrangement, and expressed the scene gets the watcher "stuck to the TV for 60 minutes." "Basic Myth" evaluated the scene 8 out of 10, expressing the scene as "light on plot winds yet packs a passionate punch," and was fairly basic for the absence of amazements in the scene's storyline. Brett Love of "television Squad" enjoyed the scene's storyline, and thought Weir's exit was executed well, notwithstanding spills from the Internet that Weir would leave, and looked at the scene among her and Oberoth to the showdowns among Neo and Agent Smith from "The Matrix" film arrangement. Be that as it may, Love was basic about the nonattendance of Teyla all through most of the scene.