The Fighting Irish 

"The Fighting Irish" is the seventeenth scene of NBC's first period of "30 Rock". It was composed by one of the period's co-official makers, Jack Burditt and it was coordinated by Dennie Gordon. It publicized on March 8, 2007 in the United States. Visitor stars who showed up in this scene were Dan Bakkedahl, Katrina Bowden, Henry Boyle, Anna Chlumsky, Siobhan Fallon Hogan, Chris Hoch, Alice Kremelberg, Nathan Lane, Boris McGiver, John F Mooney, Brian Murray, Maulik Pancholy, Lonny Ross, Molly Shannon, Jason Sudeikis and Kristen Sudeikis. 

The scene includes the presence of Jack Donaghy's (played by Alec Baldwin) sibling, Eddie Donaghy (Nathan Lane), who visits Jack guaranteeing that their dad (Brian Murray) is dead. Jack likewise reveals to Liz Lemon (Tina Fey) that she needs to flame 10% of her staff. Liz battles with this undertaking until she meets Floyd's (Jason Sudeikis) sweetheart, Liz Lemler (Anna Chlumsky), who works in the bookkeeping division at "TGS with Tracy Jordan", an anecdotal sketch parody arrangement for which Liz is the head essayist. 

Jack's crestfallen sibling, Eddie, visits him guaranteeing that their dad is dead. Jack and Eddie, in the wake of quarreling, later bond and they even choose to welcome their sisters (Molly Shannon and Siobhan Fallon Hogan) and brother by marriage (Boris McGiver) to 30 Rock for an improvised family gathering. As his family are going to watch a taping of "TGS", Jack's evidently dead dad visits Jack in his office, guaranteeing that Eddie is dead. This in the long run prompts a contention on the "TGS" stage and Liz getting pummeled by one of Jack's sisters, Katherine Catherine. 

In the interim, Liz has been advised by Jack that she needs to flame 10% of her staff. While the staff attempt their best to keep their employments, Liz battles with settling on a choice of whom to terminate. Liz's concern is fathomed when Floyd, for whom Liz has sentimental emotions, reveals to her that his better half works in bookkeeping at "TGS". After Liz fires Floyd's sweetheart, she goes out of control around 30 Rock terminating individuals, including her maker Pete Hornberger (Scott Adsit), who can't help contradicting her choice to flame Floyd's better half for her very own addition. Jack later discloses to her that he employed all the terminated individuals back, yet he is exchanging Floyd's better half to General Electric base camp in Fairfield, Connecticut. 

Tracy Jordan (Tracy Morgan) has been told by his legal advisor that he should join a religion. He solicits guidance from individuals including Liz and Jack, going similarly as going to chapel with Kenneth Parcell (Jack McBrayer). At the point when Eddie discloses Irish Catholicism to Tracy, he chooses this is the religion he was searching for and joins. 

Jason Sudeikis, Molly Shannon and Siobhan Fallon Hogan, who played Floyd, Katherine Catherine and Patrica in this scene, have all showed up in the principle cast of "Saturday Night Live", a week by week sketch parody arrangement which affectation on NBC in the United States. 

Kristen Sudeikis, the sister of Jason Sudeikis, showed up in this scene as a "propelled hip-bounce groove" exercise center class educator. Kristen Sudeikis is an expert choreographer. 

Judah Friedlander, who depicts Frank Rossitano in "30 Rock", is known for his trademark trucker caps which he wears all through the Frank character. The caps regularly have short words or expressions stuck onto them. Friedlander has expressed that he makes the caps himself. He has additionally said that "some are in-jokes, and some are only level out jokes." The thought originated from Friedlander's phenomenal persona in which his caps are altogether printed with "best on the planet" in various dialects in various appearances. In this scene, Frank wears an "additional showy 'Liz Rocks' cap" to do whatever it takes not to flame him. 

This scene is the third scene composed by Jack Burditt after "Jack Meets Dennis" and "The Baby Show". Likewise, this is the principal scene coordinated by Dennie Gordon. 

In the U.S., this scene was seen by 5.2 million watchers and got a rating of 2.5/6 in the key grown-ups 18–49 statistic as per the Nielsen evaluations framework. The 2.5 alludes to 2.5% of each of the 18-to 49-year-olds, and the 6 alludes to 6% of every one of the 18-to 49-year-olds sitting in front of the TV at the season of the communicate. 

Robert Canning of IGN composed that "while the scene was fun, there simply weren't the same number of the roar with laughter minutes that have made late scene so essential." Matt Webb Mitovich of "television Guide" composed that "something about the current week's scene, in which Liz guaranteed control, Jack discovered family and Tracy looked for religion (a subplot meriting far more prominent screen time), simply wasn't clicking for [him]." Julia Ward of AOL's "television Squad" believed that "this scene didn't achieve the ridiculous highs of 'Dark Tie'. It was more standard sitcom toll than silly euphoria, however it wasn't awful."