Kenji Ito 

, likewise known by the moniker , is a Japanese computer game writer and artist. He is best known for his work on the "Mana" and "Adventure" arrangement, however he has chipped away at more than 30 computer games all through his vocation just as formed or orchestrated music for more than 15 different collections, shows, and plays. He figured out how to play a few instruments at a youthful age, and joined Square legitimately out of school as an author in 1990 at the counsel of a teacher. He worked there for over 10 years, making numerous out of his best-known scores. In 2001, he left Square to turn into an independent writer, however has since kept on working together with the organization. 

Since leaving Square, Ito has made soundtracks to over twelve diversions, and has stretched out into organization and creation of music for plays and collections for different entertainers. Ito's work has been performed in a show devoted to his pieces just as general computer game music occasions, and he has played the piano in extra shows. Bits of his from the "Adventure" and "Mana" arrangement have been masterminded as piano performances and distributed in sheet music books. 

Conceived in Tokyo, Japan, on July 5, 1968, Ito wound up keen on music at four years old. He started to figure out how to play the piano, getting to be keen on it in the wake of hearing piano music originating from a study hall he gone by every day with his mom. He was additionally keen on Electone music, however was debilitated from learning it by a piano instructor. When he started making at the age out of ten, he had figured out how to play alto saxophone, clarinet, and piano, and was keen on turning into an artist/musician. When he was near moving on from school, he chose to seek after a vocation in forming music; when he approached an educator for guidance, the teacher prescribed turning into a computer game music arranger, given the ongoing achievement in Japan of "Mythical beast Quest III". Amid March 1990, subsequent to applying to a few computer game organizations including HAL Laboratory, Ito started working at Square. 

His first undertaking was a co-exertion that equivalent year among himself and Nobuo Uematsu for the Game Boy title "Last Fantasy Legend II" ("SaGa 2"). It drove the next year to the main collection arrival of his music, "All Sounds of SaGa", which was a mix collection of "The Final Fantasy Legend", "Last Fantasy Legend II", and "Last Fantasy Legend III"; the majority of Ito's work on "Legend II" showed up on the collection. Not long after in 1991, he made his first solo work, the soundtrack for "Conclusive Fantasy Adventure" ("Seiken Densetsu"), another Game Boy title. He at that point came back to the "Adventure" arrangement for the following couple of years, creating the soundtracks to the Super Famicom's "Romancing SaGa", "Romancing SaGa 2", and "Romancing SaGa 3". These soundtracks started Ito's initially organized collections; the principal diversion was masterminded in a French melodic style by Masaaki Mizuguchi, while the other two were orchestrated by Ryou Fukui and Taro Iwashiro, separately, into symphonic pieces. Ito was initially planned to proceed with the "Mana" arrangement and create the soundtrack to "Seiken Densetsu 2" ("Secret of Mana"), however was compelled to hand the venture off to Hiroki Kikuta as his first score because of the interest on his time for scoring "Romancing SaGa". 

1995 denoted the first run through since he began making that he took a shot at a title outside the "Mana" or "Adventure" arrangement; he made the music for "Koi wa Balance" and was an individual from an eight-man group for "Tobal No. 1". He came back to the "Adventure" arrangement in 1997 with "Adventure Frontier", and completed out the decade with "Chocobo Racing" and "Chocobo's Dungeon 2"; for "Chocobo Racing" he just organized past works from the "Chocobo" and "Last Fantasy" arrangement, and contributed just a couple of tracks to "Chocobo's Dungeon 2". He left Square in 2001 to turn into an independent author. He has said that this move was so as to give him the adaptability to deal with something beyond computer game music. 

The principal work that Ito made in the wake of leaving Square was the soundtrack to "Culdcept II", which he sees as his best work. He credits this inclination both to the way that it was his first independent piece and that he took care of all parts of the music generation, from structure through game plan and sound creation. From that point he came back to working with Square and the "Mana" arrangement with the change of his second soundtrack, "Last Fantasy Adventure", into the soundtrack of "Sword of Mana". It was a demonstration he would rehash two years after the fact for Square, presently Square Enix, with the change of "Romancing SaGa", "Romancing SaGa: Minstrel Song". He has since come back to the "Mana" arrangement twice, with the soundtracks to "Offspring of Mana" and "Sunrise of Mana". The majority of the computer game soundtracks that he has created since the third extension pack for "Cross Gate" in 2004 have been with the help of different writers aside from 2007's "Saint Must Die", however amid those years he has fanned out from computer games into forming and delivering collections and singles for entertainers just as making music for plays and shows. He has likewise discharged a collection of piano pieces that he has made; just two of the eight tracks are from his computer game works. 

Ito performed piano live amid September 22, 2006 "Press Start 2006 - Symphony of Games-" live show, at which a few of his pieces were performed by an ensemble. This show pursued a show of August 26, 2006 "Manami Kiyota x Kenji Ito Collaboration Live" in which he played the piano for tunes made by him for the occasion and sung by Manami Kiyota; he has likewise played the piano at shows given by "The Black Mages", a band made out of present or previous Square performers, before they extended to incorporate a full-time musician. Music created by Ito has additionally been performed at the "Additional - Hyper Game Music Event 2007" and "Christmas Live 2008 "gentleecho - prelude-"" shows. 

Music created by Ito was performed at a show committed to his music on February 21, 2009 titled "delicate reverberation meeting" at the Uchisaiwaicho Hall in Chiyoda, Tokyo. A gathering of five artists performed eight of his melodies, blended with exhibitions by Ito and exchanges about his music among himself and Masahiro Sakurai. The occasion started as a show because of Ito's desire to have one dependent on his music, yet after the space the sorting out organization, Harmonics International, leased ended up being controlled by a secondary school colleague of Ito, at the schoolmate's request the exchanges of Ito's music were added to the program. 

Music from the first soundtracks of "Sunrise of Mana" and "Sword of Mana" has been masterminded the piano and distributed by DOREMI Music Publishing. Two gathering books of music from the arrangement in general have likewise been distributed as "Seiken Densetsu Best Collection Piano Solo Sheet Music" first and second versions, with the main release including tracks by Ito from "Definite Fantasy Adventure" while the second included tracks he made from "Sunrise of Mana". All tunes in each book have been revamped by Asako Niwa as intermediating level piano performances, however they are intended to sound however much like the firsts as could reasonably be expected. Moreover, KMP Music Publishing has distributed a book of the piano music incorporated into the "Sword of Mana" soundtrack collection, which Ito orchestrated from his unique organizations. DOREMI Music Publishing additionally distributed music from the first soundtracks of a portion of the "Adventure" diversions that Ito formed as piano sheet music book; music from "Romancing SaGa 3", "Romancing SaGa Minstrel Song", and "Adventure Frontier" were composed by Asako Niwa for piano performances of starting to middle trouble. 

Ito's music is principally propelled by pictures from the amusement as opposed to outside impacts; be that as it may, he never played the diversions themselves. The main computer games that he plays are sports diversions; he has just observed up to the initial motion picture for a large portion of the pretending amusements that he has composed music for. While a large number of his pieces are instrumental, he appreciates working in an account studio and appreciates forming "ordinary melodies" as much as his symphonic works. His most loved computer game music from different writers incorporate the music from "Star Fox", "Winged serpent Quest", "Last Fantasy", "Wizardry" and "Nobunaga's Ambition". Non-computer game music that has motivated him incorporates Japanese famous music and soundtracks to anime works, just as simple listening music, for example, Paul Mauriat or Richard Clayderman, particularly string music. These impacts have driven him to wish to make music "that you can tune in to while you unwind". He additionally wishes to grow his creations outside computer game music and into melodies.