Crossroads (2002 film)

Crossroads is a 2002 American comedy-drama road film set in Georgia. Directed by Tamra Davis and written by Shonda Rhimes, the film stars pop singer Britney Spears, actors Anson Mount, Zoe Saldana, Taryn Manning, Kim Cattrall, and comedian/actor Dan Aykroyd. The film was produced by MTV Films and released on February 15, 2002, in North America by Paramount Pictures. The plot centers on three teenage girls as they take a cross-country road trip, finding themselves and their friendship in the process.

Development on the film began in 2001, when Spears created a concept that was later expanded by Rhimes. Principal filming began on March 2001, and encompassed over a period of six months. Critics gave negative reviews to "Crossroads"; however, they considered it a better effort when compared to Mariah Carey's 2001 film "Glitter". Despite the movie's response from critics, it was a box office success, grossing over $61.1 million worldwide in three months.

Lucy (Britney Spears), Kit (Zoe Saldana), and Mimi (Taryn Manning) are three friends who live in a small Georgia town. As young children, they bury a "wish box", vow to dig it up on the night of their high school graduation and pledge to stay best friends forever. However, as they grow up, their friendship fades due to their different approaches of high school: Lucy becomes the introverted valedictorian, Kit becomes the most popular girl in school, and Mimi becomes an outcast from a trailer park who is facing teenage pregnancy. On the night of their high school graduation, they keep their promise and get together to open the "wish box". As they start talking again, they remember their old wishes while burying the box: Mimi wanted to travel to California, Lucy wanted to find her mother, and Kit wanted to get married. Mimi brings up going to Los Angeles to audition for a record company. Kit and Lucy try to convince Mimi to not go all the way to Los Angeles due to the fact that she is 5 months pregnant and anything dangerous can happen. However, the next morning they decide to go together but each doing something separate: Mimi going to the audition, Kit visiting her fiancé, and Lucy finding her mother in Tucson, Arizona.

They set out on the road with little money in a yellow 1973 Buick Skylark convertible with a man named Ben (Anson Mount). Lucy, however, leaves without the permission of her overbearing father Pete (Dan Aykroyd), who wakes up the next day to find his daughter is gone. Shortly into their journey, the car breaks down. They realize that together they don't have enough money for either the travel or the repair costs. Mimi then suggests that they sing karaoke at a local bar, where good singers are tipped well by the customers. While at the bar, the girls dress up and go to the stage to perform. However, when the song starts, Mimi develops stage fright, and is unable to sing. Seeing that they needed the money, Lucy takes her place, and quickly becomes a hit with the crowd. They make enough money to fix the car and continue on their way.

Shortly after the group checks into a motel, Kit tells the girls about a rumor that she had heard about Ben, commenting that he had recently been released from jail, after killing someone. The girls then spend most of the journey feeling uneasy around him until they confront him. Ben reveals that he was in jail for driving his stepsister across state borders without parental consent because his stepfather was abusing her. Having established that Ben was not the assassin that they imagined him to be, Lucy and Ben grow closer especially after she reads him a poem she wrote about growing up in life. The girls talk properly to each other for the first time since they were kids. Lucy reveals that her mother left her and her father when she was a child, but she is convinced that her mother wants to find her, but is too scared. Kit, who was overweight as a child, has an overbearing mother who sent her to "fat camp" but now cannot stand that her daughter is more beautiful than her. Mimi reveals that her baby's father is not her ex-boyfriend, but a guy who raped her after she got drunk at a party, and that she is planning to put the baby up for adoption.

After they arrive in Tucson, Lucy finds her mother Caroline; who however is not happy to see her. She reveals that she has remarried, and that she now has two sons ages seven and ten. She reveals to Lucy that she was an unintended pregnancy and that she wants nothing to do with her, and Lucy leaves the house heartbroken as she was proven to be the selfish woman her father warned her about. As she promptly arrives at the motel, Ben comforts her and impresses her by writing some music to her poem. The following day, Lucy rejoins the others and goes on to Los Angeles. When they arrive, Kit brings Mimi along to surprise her fiancé, Dylan. While alone in the hotel, Lucy gives her virginity to Ben and they fall in love with each other. When Kit and Mimi arrive at Dylan's place, it is revealed that he is cheating on Kit after they see another girl in his apartment. Already upset, Kit suddenly realizes that it was Dylan who raped Mimi and got her pregnant, and she punches him. Scared, Mimi runs away and falls down the stairs. Consequently, she loses her baby. The girls comfort her as she comes to terms with her loss as she had decided to keep the baby.

Because of this, Lucy decides to call her father to take her and the girls back home. However, her father is still putting pressure on Lucy to do what he wants. Kit and Mimi tell her that they think she should go to the audition in Mimi's place. She initially declines, but when she gets into her father's car, after the entire journey, she realizes that everything that she has done has been to please her father instead of herself. Lucy tells her father to let her go and she runs after Ben, they embrace and kiss each other. She and the girls head off to the audition with Ben and receive a standing ovation after their performance of Lucy's song, "I'm Not a Girl, Not Yet a Woman".

In the end, the girls bury their “wish box” at the beach, this time deciding not to make any wishes in the future but instead to focus on the present and their friendship.


In early 2001, Spears said that she had plans to make her film debut. She and her team then created a concept for it, which was later developed by "Grey's Anatomy" creator Shonda Rimes. Spears commented that she "talked to [Rimes] and told her what I wanted the movie to be about and she elaborated on it. It was my little project. When you do a movie, I think you have to be really passionate about it. I was having a lot of offers, but this is something my heart was into." A press conference was held during the Marché International du Disque et de l'Edition Musicale (MIDEM) in Cannes, France, on January 19, 2002, where Spears also premiered the film.

Filming for "Crossroads" initiated in March 2001 in Baton Rouge and Hammond, Louisiana, near Spears' hometown. Due to the fact that Spears was also recording her third studio album along with the film's production, filming only wrapped up after six months. Additional scenes were filmed in Los Angeles, California. "Crossroads" had a total budget of $10 million; a relatively low budget by industry standards. According to the Louisiana Film and Video Commission, the film was originally titled "What Friends are For". Spears described it as a teen movie that deals with real issues that normal teenagers live on a daily basis. She continued to explain the film's content, saying that it "is about this journey that the three of us best friends take, finding ourselves and what we want out of life and getting our friendship back. Friends are all you have at the end of the day. When your boyfriend breaks up with you, who do you call? Your girlfriend. I just love that message."

Justin Long, who plays one of Lucy's best friends from high school, thought that "Crossroads" is "like a road trip buddy movie for girls." Long also said that he was impressed by Spears' work ethic, commenting that "she could not have been more down to earth. She's the sweetest girl. After 10 minutes, I forgot she was a big pop star." Anson Mount, who plays Ben, revealed that actor Robert De Niro ran a few of Spears' lines with him while rehearsing for the film. Mount revealed that De Niro called the singer "a sweet girl" and convinced him to do "Crossroads".

"Crossroads" was released in the United States on February 15, 2002. On its opening day, the film grossed an estimated $5.2 million in 2,380 theaters, becoming the second highest-grossing film of the day. On the first weekend of its release, "Crossroads" placed second, grossing an estimate of $14,527,187. By the second week, the film dropped a 52% on tickets sales, ranking at number 5 on the Box Office. "Crossroads" was a moderate financial success, grossing a total $37,191,304 in the United States. Worldwide, the film grossed a total of $61,141,030 until its close day, on May 9, 2002.

On review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, the fim has an approval rating of 14% based on 103 reviews, with an average rating of 3.9/10. The site's critical consensus reads, "A cliched and silly pop star vanity project, "Crossroads" is strictly for Britney fans only." Metacritic, which assigns a weighted average rating, gave the film a score of 27 out of 100, based on 31 critics, indicating "generally unfavorable reviews".

Robert K. Elder of the "Chicago Tribune" said "Spears delivers a performance with the same sincerity she invests into a Pepsi commercial, only this film contains twice the sugary calories", while "New York Daily News" writer Elizabeth Weitzma noted, "Here's what "Crossroads" does not have: Cohesive direction from Tamra Davis, intelligent dialogue, a comprehensible plot". Maitland McDonagh of "TV Guide" commented that "the film's mealy-mouthed messages about feminine empowerment will almost certainly fall on deaf ears, since even 11-year-olds know Spears's power resides largely in her taut torso". Claudia Puig of "USA Today" considered it "less a movie than a mind-numbingly dull road trip", while "The Washington Post" reporter Ann Hornaday said, "not a music video, not yet a movie, but more like an extended-play advertisement for the Product that is Britney". Jane Dark of "Village Voice" compared "Crossroads" to Mariah Carey's "Glitter", saying, "you spend a lot of time wondering, 'Better or worse than "Glitter"?' You think if the projectionist cranked the volume a little you could actually sort of get into this".

John Anderson of "Los Angeles Times" commented "Spears acquits herself as well as anyone might, in a movie as contrived and lazy as this one". Chris Kaltenbach of "Baltimore Sun" said, "go see "Crossroads" if you want to hear Britney sing or see her wear next-to-nothing. But otherwise, avoid this train wreck at all costs". Lisa Schwarzbaum of "Entertainment Weekly", however, gave the movie a positive review, commenting "Crossroads" "not only makes excellent use of the singer's sweetly coltish acting abilities, but it also promotes a standardized set of sturdy values with none of Mariah Carey's desperate "Glitter," or any of Mandy Moore's gummy pap in "A Walk to Remember"". Bret Fetzer of Amazon.com also gave a positive review, noting that the movie "could have been trite schmaltz, but the script has some grit and the direction is fresh and relaxed--and, most significantly, Spears is far more sympathetic and engaging than you might expect". Jane Crowther of BBC applauded Cattrall and Aykroyd's interactions with the characters, and said that "Spears manages to come across on film as natural, endearing, and extremely likable". "Time" named it one of the top 10 worst chick flicks.

Spears had initially recorded "Overprotected", "I'm Not a Girl, Not Yet a Woman", "Bombastic Love" and a cover of "I Love Rock 'n' Roll" for "Crossroads"; the songs were later included on the singer's third studio album, "Britney" (2001). The soundtrack album features tracks by Spears, Mystikal, Matthew Sweet, Jars of Clay and Bowling for Soup. "Crossroads (Music from the Major Motion Picture)" was released by Zomba Records on February 2, 2002, and was produced by Rodney Jerkins, The Neptunes, Fred Maher, Matthew Sweet, Dennis Herring, Jaret Reddick, Max Martin, and Rami Yacoub. "Overprotected" was remixed by JS16 for the soundtrack album.


Source:



