Grandes Éxitos (Luis Miguel album)

Grandes Éxitos (English: "Greatest Hits") is a greatest hits album by Mexican singer Luis Miguel. Released on 22 November 2005 by Warner Music Latina, the album features 24 previously-recorded songs from Miguel's career with his record label as well as two new songs ("Misterios del Amor" and "Si Te Perdiera"); both songs were released as singles from the album. A special edition of the record was also released and features six extra songs as well as a DVD containing music videos from Miguel's career. "Grandes Éxitos" received a favorable review by AllMusic critic, Thom Jurek who commended Miguel's trajectory as an artist. Commercially, it reached number one in Mexico and the top ten in Argentina, Spain, Portugal, and the "Bilboard" Top Latin Albums chart in the United States. It was certified Multi-Platinum in Mexico and the United States (Latin) and Platinum in Spain.

On 15 October 2005, Luis Miguel announced that he was releasing a greatest hits album on 22 November 2005. The contains 24 previously-recorded songs from his music career, ranging from pop music, boleros from his "Romance" series, and mariachi. The set includes tracks he recorded under his label Warner Music Latina since 1987. A special edition of the was also released on 22 November and features six extra songs, as well as a DVD of his music videos. 

Two original songs were composed for "Grandes Éxitos": "Misterios del Amor" and "Si Te Perdiera". The former song was composed by Francisco Loyo and Alejandro Asensi while the latter track was written by Manuel Alejandro; both songs were produced by Miguel. "Misterios del Amor" was released as the album's lead single on 24 October 2005 and peaked at number 29 on the "Billboard" Hot Latin Songs chart in the United States. "Si Te Perdiera" was released as the album's second single on 17 January 2006 and peaked at number 47 on the Hot Latin Songs chart. "Si Te Perdiera" served as the main theme for the Mexican telenovela "La verdad oculta" (2006).

AllMusic critic Thom Jurek gave "Grandes Éxitos" four-out-of-five stars noting Miguel's maturity from a teen idol into crooner. He commented some of the songs sounds "dated" but remarked that Miguel's trajectory as "utterly engaging and worthwhile". In the United States, "Grandes Éxitos" peaked at number eight on the "Billboard" Top Latin Albums chart and was certified double platinum in the Latin field by the Recording Industry Association of America for shipping 200,000 copies. In Mexico, the double-disc reached the top of the Top 100 Mexico albums chart and was certified triple platinum by the Asociación Mexicana de Productores de Fonogramas y Videogramas (AMPROFON) for shipping 300,000 units. The DVD was certified platinum and gold by AMPROFON as well for shipments of 30,000 units. In Argentina, it peaked at number three on the albums chart. In Europe, the record peaked at number five in Spain and was certified platinum by the Productores de Música de España and reached seven in Portugal.

Adapted from the "Grandes Éxitos" liner notes:




