USS McDougal (DD-54)

USS "McDougal" (Destroyer No. 54/DD-54) was an built for the United States Navy prior to the American entry into World War I. The ship was the second U.S. Navy vessel named in honor of David Stockton McDougal, a U.S. Navy officer notable for his leadership during an 1863 battle off Japan while in command of .

"McDougal" was laid down by Bath Iron Works of Bath, Maine, in July 1913 and launched in April 1914. The ship was a little more than in length, just over abeam, and had a standard displacement of . She was armed with four guns and had eight 21 inch (533 mm) torpedo tubes. "McDougal" was powered by a pair of steam turbines that propelled her at up to .

After her June 1914 commissioning, "McDougal" sailed off the east coast and in the Caribbean. She was one of seventeen destroyers sent out to rescue survivors from five victims of German submarine off the Lightship Nantucket in October 1916, and carried 6 crewmen from a sunken Dutch cargo ship to Newport, Rhode Island. After the United States entered World War I in April 1917, "McDougal" was part of the first U.S. destroyer squadron sent overseas. Patrolling the Irish Sea out of Queenstown, Ireland, "McDougal" made several unsuccessful attacks on U-boats, and rescued survivors of ships sunk by the German craft. After a collision with a British cargo ship in February 1918, "McDougal" was under repair until mid-July, and afterwards, operated out of Brest, France.

Upon returning to the United States after the war, "McDougal" conducted operations with the destroyers of the Atlantic Fleet until August 1919, when she was placed in reserve, still in commission. After a brief stint of operations in mid 1921, she was placed in reserve until she was decommissioned at Philadelphia in May 1922. In June 1924, "Ericsson" was transferred to the United States Coast Guard to help enforce Prohibition as a part of the "Rum Patrol". She operated under the name USCGC "McDougal" (CG-6) until May 1933, when she was returned to the Navy. In November she dropped her name to free it for a new destroyer of the same name, becoming known only as DD-54. She was struck for the Naval Vessel Register in July 1934 and sold for scrapping in August.

"McDougal" was authorized in March 1913 as the fourth of six ships of the , which was an improved version of the s authorized in 1911. Construction of the vessel was awarded to Bath Iron Works of Bath, Maine, which laid down her keel on 29 July 1913. On 22 April 1914, "McDougal" was launched by sponsor Miss Marguerite S. LeBreton, granddaughter of the Commander David Stockton McDougal, the ship's namesake. The ship was the first U.S. Navy ship named for McDougal, notable for his leadership during an 1863 battle off Japan while in command of . As built, the destroyer was in length, abeam, and drew . The ship had a standard displacement of and displaced when fully loaded.

"McDougal" had two Zoelly steam turbines that drove her two screw propellers, and an additional triple-expansion steam engine connected to one of the propeller shafts for cruising purposes. Four oil-burning White-Forster boilers powered the engines, which could generate , moving the ship at the design speed of . During her acceptance trials in May 1914, "McDougal" averaged in a 15-minute run, but topped out at for a , top-speed run.

"McDougal"s main battery consisted of 4 × /50 caliber Mark 9 guns, with each gun weighing in excess of . The guns fired armor-piercing projectiles at . At an elevation of 20°, the guns had a range of .

"McDougal" was also equipped with eight torpedo tubes. The General Board of the United States Navy had called for two anti-aircraft guns for the "O'Brien"-class ships, as well as provisions for laying up to 36 floating mines. From sources, it is unclear if these recommendations were followed for "McDougal" or any of the other ships of the class.

USS "McDougal" was commissioned into the United States Navy on 16 June 1914 at Boston under the temporary command of Lieutenant, junior grade, John H. Hoover; Lieutenant Commander Leigh C. Palmer assumed command on 27 July. After a shakedown cruise, "McDougal" began duty with the Torpedo Flotilla, Atlantic Fleet. Prior to America’s entry into World War I, she operated out of New York and Newport, Rhode Island, and carried out maneuvers and tactical exercises along the east coast.

In early April 1915, "McDougal" and destroyer were temporarily assigned to patrol near the New York Quarantine Station. There were concerns by Dudley Field Malone, the local port collector, that some of the interned German steamships at New York might try to slip out during a heavy snowstorm. While onboard on "McDougal" during one of these patrols, Malone discovered what "The New York Times" termed a "widespread conspiracy" intended to supply British warships outside U.S. territorial waters, in violation of the American neutrality in World War I.

She cruised to the Caribbean and took part in fleet war games between January and May 1916, and in addition served intermittently with the Neutrality patrol. In May, she was declared the "champion smokeless vessel" of the U.S. Navy by "The Christian Science Monitor" after she was able to steam at for four hours without betraying her position by smoke. In June, "The Washington Post" reported that she was damaged during maneuvers off Cape Ann, and had to put into the Boston Navy Yard for leak repairs.

At 05:30 on Sunday, 8 October 1916, wireless reports came in of a German submarine stopping ships near the Lightship Nantucket, off the eastern end of Long Island. After an SOS from the British steamer was received at about 12:30, Rear Admiral Albert Gleaves ordered "McDougal" and other destroyers at Newport to attend to survivors. According to a firsthand account of the events by Nathan Levy, a quartermaster on "McDougal", published on 22 October in "The New York Times", the destroyer steamed the distance to the lightship in three-and-a-half hours, arriving after German submarine had stopped the Holland America Line cargo ship and the British passenger ship . As Rose had done with three other ships "U-53" had sunk earlier in the day, he gave passengers and crew aboard "Blommersdijk" and "Stephano" adequate time to abandon the ships. After sinking "Blommersdijk" with two torpedoes, Rose focused his attention on "Stephano", having to signal "McDougal" and to ask that the two destroyers move farther away so that he could sink the British ship. Six American destroyers witnessed "U-53" sink the liner with her deck gun. In total, 226 survivors from "U-53"s five victims were rescued by the destroyer flotilla; "McDougal" rescued 6 of "Blommersdijk"s men.

"McDougal" returned to the Caribbean for exercises during the first three months of 1917, and then returned to New York and Newport to prepare for distant service.

Soon after the United States declared war on Germany on 6 April 1917, "McDougal" departed for Europe as a part of the first U.S. destroyer division sent overseas during the war. Steaming with , the division's flagship, under the command of Joseph K. Taussig, "McDougal", "Porter", , "Conyngham", and departed New York on 24 April and arrived at Queenstown, Ireland, on 4 May and began patrolling the southern approaches to the Irish Sea the next day. "McDougal" patrolled off the Irish coast, escorting convoys of merchant ships and troop transports, searching for German submarines, and performing rescue operations for ships sunk. When British ship was torpedoed and sunk by on 5 June 1917, "McDougal" sped to her assistance and rescued 33 survivors.

On 8 September, as "McDougal" escorted a convoy off the southwest coast of England, she detected a surfaced submarine in the early morning hours and gave chase at full speed. The U-boat submerged about ahead of the closing destroyer, and "McDougal" dropped two depth charges which brought an oil slick to the surface. According to the "Dictionary of American Naval Fighting Ships", "McDougal"s actions prevented an attack on the convoy and resulted in "probable damage" to the submarine.

On 4 February 1918, "McDougal" and the British cargo ship "Glenmorag" collided in the Irish Sea. The destroyer made her way to Liverpool and underwent repairs that lasted until mid-July. Upon reentering service, "McDougal" was transferred to Brest to serve as an escort for convoys approaching the French port.

Following the signing of the Armistice on 11 November 1918, which ended all fighting, "McDougal" remained in French waters for a time. Crewmen aboard "McDougal" helped raise money to provide a Thanksgiving dinner for 150 "poor children" of Brest on 28 November, Thanksgiving Day in the United States. When President Woodrow Wilson arrived at Brest on just over two weeks later, the destroyer served as part of that transport's escort into the harbor. On 21 December, "McDougal" departed Brest 21 December with Destroyer Division 7 and reached New York 8 January 1919.

"McDougal" resumed duty along the east coast and, during May, provided part of the comprehensive at-sea support as U.S. Navy seaplanes undertook the historic first aerial crossing of the Atlantic. After completing exercises in the Caribbean, she was placed in commission, in reserve at New York on 7 August. She was laid up in reduced commission at Philadelphia and Charleston, South Carolina, in the years that followed. She was reactivated for training in New England waters during the summer of 1921, but returned to Philadelphia, where she was decommissioned on 26 May 1922.

On 17 January 1920, Prohibition was instituted by law in the United States. Soon, the smuggling of alcoholic beverages along the coastlines of the United States became widespread and blatant. The Treasury Department eventually determined that the United States Coast Guard simply did not have the ships to constitute a successful patrol. To cope with the problem, President Calvin Coolidge in 1924 authorized the transfer from the Navy to the Coast Guard of twenty old destroyers that were in reserve and out of commission. "McDougal" was activated and acquired by the Coast Guard on 7 June 1924. Designated "CG-6", "McDougal" was commissioned on 28 May 1925, and joined the "Rum Patrol" to aid in the attempt to enforce prohibition laws.

In August 1929, "McDougal" and were dispatched to locate and sink the steamer "Quimistan", which had been reported as abandoned and on fire in the Atlantic east of Norfolk, Virginia. In April 1933, "McDougal" was one of the Coast Guard ships deployed to search for the U.S. Navy airship when it crashed into the Atlantic on the night of 3/4 April. Later that same month, "McDougal" was dispatched to help the Italian steamer "Voluntas" when she had requested assistance on the 23rd, but was recalled when "Voluntas" rescinded the call for help.

After nearly eight years of Coast Guard service, "McDougal" was decommissioned at Philadelphia on 26 May 1933 and returned to the custody of the U.S. Navy on 30 June. On 1 November 1933, she dropped the name "McDougal" to free it for a new destroyer of the same name, becoming known only as "DD-54". The ship was struck from the Naval Vessel Register on 5 July 1934, and, on 22 August, was sold for scrapping in accordance with the London Naval Treaty for the limitation of naval armaments.


