She's like a Star

"She's like a Star" is a song written, produced and performed by British singer and songwriter Taio Cruz. It was released on 18 August 2008 as the fifth single from his debut studio album "Departure" (2008). An R&B ballad, the lyrics of "She's like a Star" are about the theme of parenthood, an idea which inspired Cruz to compose the song. The song was remixed to feature vocals from English girl group Sugababes and American rapper K.R. , and American rapper Busta Rhymes. It received generally mixed reviews from critics, who were ambivalent towards the composition. Upon release, it peaked at number twenty on the UK Singles Chart. The song's music video features "Hollyoaks" actress Roxanne McKee as Cruz's love interest. Cruz performed the song with the Sugababes at the 2008 MOBO Awards ceremony, and at Radio 1's Big Weekend 2011.

"She's Like a Star" was written and produced by Taio Cruz for his debut studio album "Departure" (2008). He composed the song in the middle of 2007, towards the completion of the album's recording, and was inspired to write it based on the idea of parenthood. During an interview with "Sugar", Cruz explained that the song has a double meaning behind it:

"She's like a Star" is the fifth single from "Departure", and was released in the United Kingdom on 18 August 2008. There are several remixes of the song, including one by Cahill which is more uptempo than the original version. A remix that features vocals from English girl group Sugababes and American rapper Busta Rhymes was also released. According to the "Daily Mirror", the collaboration came about when they ran into each other at the Hot 97 studios in New York City. The remix appears on the Sugababes' sixth studio album "Catfights and Spotlights" (2008).

Alex Fletcher of Digital Spy rated the song three out of five stars and stated that it is "undoubtedly" one of the album's low points. Additionally, he criticised the song's lack of "bravado and pizazz" in comparison to Cruz's previous singles "I Can Be" and "Come On Girl". Andy Welch of the "Halesowen News" described it as "a fine example of a Brit doing R&B as well as the Americans", but was unimpressed with the child's voice sample. Hazel Robinson from the BBC Chart Blog gave the song a full five-star rating, and wrote that its composition and musical arrangement produced a song that sounds natural and "pretty extraordinary". The reviewer admitted that while "She's like a Star" was not the best track from "Departure", it sounds "infinitely cooler" than the album's previous single "I Can Be". "Daily Record"'s Rick Fulton praised "She's like a Star" as "one of the best R&B sounds to come out of the UK". "She's like a Star" earned Cruz a MOBO Award nomination for Best UK Male.

The song debuted at number 44 on the UK Singles Chart in the issue dated 16 August 2008. It peaked at number 20 three weeks later, and spent a total of 15 weeks on the chart. "She's like a Star" became Cruz's fifth consecutive top-thirty hit in the United Kingdom, and outpeaked the album's first two singles "I Just Wanna Know" and "Moving On".

The music video for "She's like a Star" was filmed in Spain. It features an appearance from the actress Roxanne McKee, known for her role as Louise in the British television soap opera "Hollyoaks", in which she plays Cruz's love interest. Cruz, who is friends with McKee, explained how the collaboration came about, saying:

Most scenes of the video take place in a large house. Throughout the video, the pair are touching and kissing with each other, and McKee is shown in the bathtub. In the concluding scenes, she leaves the house and is depicted as a bright star that travels towards the sky, while Cruz stands in front of the house by the pool.

The singer performed "She's like a Star" at the O2 Academy Sheffield, England in August 2008 along with many other tracks from "Departure". The Sugababes, along with Cruz, performed the song as part of a medley with their single "Girls" at the 2008 MOBO Awards ceremony. Cruz performed it on MTV Live Sessions along with many of his previous and follow-up singles. He performed "She's like a Star" on 15 May 2011 at Radio 1's Big Weekend, as the fourth song on the set list, which included his hits "Break Your Heart", "Higher" and "Dynamite".






