SMS Árpád

SMS "Árpád"  was a pre-dreadnought battleship built by the Austro-Hungarian Navy in the early 20th century. She was launched on 11 September 1901 as the second of three s. Along with her sister ships, she participated at the bombardment of Ancona during World War I. Due to a shortage of coal, she was soon decommissioned after the bombardment of Ancona and used as harbor defense ship for the remainder of the war. After the war, all of the "Habsburg"-class battleships were ceded to Great Britain as war prizes. She was scrapped in Italy in 1921.

"Árpád" was the second of three battleships of her class. Her hull was laid down on 10 June 1899 at the Stabilimento Tecnico Triestino shipyard in Trieste. Following more than two years of construction, she was launched on 11 September 1901. After final fitting-out work was finished, "Árpád" was fully ready for service and commissioned into the Austro-Hungarian Navy on 15 June 1903.

Like all ships of her class, "Árpád" was long at the waterline and was in overall length. She had a beam of and a draft of . Freeboard was approximately forward and about aft. She also displaced . Once construction on her had finished and she was commissioned into the Navy, "Árpád" had a crew of 638 officers and enlisted men.

"Árpád" was powered by 2-shaft, 4-cylinder vertical triple expansion engines, which were supplied with steam by 16 Belleville boilers. "Árpád"s power output was rated at , which produced a top speed of .

The hull for the ship was constructed from longitudinal and transverse steel frames, over which the outer hull plates were riveted into place. The hull incorporated a double bottom that ran for 63% of the ship's length. A series of watertight bulkheads also extended from the keel to the gun deck. All in all, there was a total of 174 watertight compartments in the ship. "Árpád" had a metacentric height of between and . Bilge keels were mounted on either side of the hull to reduce rolling and prevent her from capsizing. "Árpád" had a flush main deck that was planked with wood, while the upper decks were covered with linoleum or corticine.

"Árpád" had three L/40 guns, two mounted in a twin turret forward and one mounted in a single turret aft of the main superstructure. The C 97-type guns were manufactured by Krupp in Germany. The main guns fired at a rate of between three and four armor-piercing (AP) shells per minute. Her secondary armament consisted of twelve SK L/40 guns in casemates. These guns could fire at 4–5 shells per minute. She was built with face-hardened chrome-nickel steel. The main armored belt was in the central portion of the ship, where the ammunition magazines, machinery spaces, and other critical areas were located. The belt tapered slightly to on either end of the central section.

"Árpád" took part in her first fleet maneuvers in mid-1903 with her sister ship "Habsburg". The third sister, "Babenberg", was commissioned in Summer 1904, and participated in successive fleet drills. Following a series of simulated war games pitting "Árpád" and her sister ships against the three battleships, "Árpád" and the other two "Habsburg"-class ships became the I Battleship Division. This new division was active in the Mediterranean region. When "Habsburg" underwent a training cruise with the three "Monarch"-class battleships in January 1903, "Árpád" joined her the next year in a voyage around the Mediterranean Sea. With the commissioning of the s in 1906 and 1907, the "Habsburg"-class ships were transferred from the I to the II Battleship Division, and the three "Monarch"-class battleships were moved from the II to the III Battleship Division. In 1910–1911, "Árpád" had one of her superstructure decks removed to reduce weight.

Early in World War I, "Árpád" was transferred to the Austro-Hungarian Navy's IV Division after the first new s came into service. At around the same time, "Árpád", her sister ships and and the remainder of the Austro-Hungarian Navy were mobilized to support the flight of and from 28 July to 10 August 1914. The two German ships were stationed in the Mediterranean and were attempting to break out of the strait of Messina, which was surrounded by British vessels. After breaking out, the German ships planned to steam to Turkey. After the Germans successfully broke out of Messina, the Austro-Hungarian Navy was recalled. The fleet had by that time advanced as far south as Brindisi in southeastern coast of Italy. After Italy entered the war on the side of France and Great Britain, the Austro-Hungarian Navy bombarded several Italian port cities along the Adriatic coast. "Árpád" took part in the Bombardment of Ancona on 23 May 1915.

Due to a coal shortage, "Árpád" was later decommissioned and re-purposed as a harbor defense ship for the latter half of the war. "Árpád"s crew was transferred to man the new U-boats and aircraft. Following the war, "Árpád", along with her sister ships, were awarded to Great Britain as war prizes. They were sold to Italy and broken up for scrap in 1921.

Explanatory notes

Citations



