SMS Gazelle

SMS "Gazelle" was the lead ship of the ten-vessel light cruiser , built by the Imperial German Navy. She was built by the Germaniawerft shipyard in Kiel, laid down in 1897, launched in March 1898, and commissioned into the High Seas Fleet in June 1901. Armed with a main battery of ten guns and two torpedo tubes, "Gazelle" was capable of a top speed of . 

Initially assigned to overseas service, "Gazelle" participated in the Venezuelan crisis of 1902–03. She returned to German waters in 1904, and served with the fleet until 1914. She was employed as a coastal defense ship after the outbreak of World War I in August 1914. She served in this role until the night of 25–26 January 1916, when she struck a mine off Cape Arkona. The Navy deemed "Gazelle" not worth repairing and reduced her to a mine storage hulk, a role she retained through the end of the war. In August 1920, she was stricken from the naval register and sold for scrap.

"Gazelle" was long overall and had a beam of and a draft of forward. She displaced at full combat load. Her propulsion system consisted of two triple-expansion engines manufactured by AG-Germania. They were designed to give , for a top speed of . The engines were powered by eight coal-fired Niclausse boilers. "Gazelle" carried of coal, which gave her a range of at . She had a crew of 14 officers and 243 enlisted men.

"Gazelle"s armament consisted of ten 10.5 cm SK L/40 guns in single mounts. Two were placed side-by-side forward on the forecastle, six were located amidships, three on either side, and two were placed side-by-side aft. The guns could engage targets out to . They were supplied with 1,000 rounds of ammunition, for 100 shells per gun. She was also equipped with three torpedo tubes with eight torpedoes. One was submerged in the hull in the bow and two were mounted in deck launchers on the broadside. 

The ship was protected by an armored deck that was thick. The conning tower had thick sides, and the guns were protected by thick shields.

"Gazelle" was ordered under the contract name "G" and was laid down at the Germaniawerft shipyard in Kiel in 1897. She was launched on 31 March 1898, after which fitting-out work commenced. She was commissioned into the High Seas Fleet on 15 June 1901.

After her commissioning, "Gazelle" was sent overseas from 1902 to 1904, assigned to the American Squadron. Together with the unprotected cruiser she proceeded to La Guaira and Carúpano in Venezuela to protect German nationals from expected fighting in June 1902, and the following weeks evacuated German and French nationals from the two cities to Saint Thomas. Starting in December 1902, "Gazelle" participated in the Venezuelan crisis of 1902–03. An Anglo-German naval force instituted a blockade of the Venezuelan coast to secure payment of foreign debts. "Gazelle" and the "Falke" were the German contribution to the blockading squadron; they joined four British cruisers and three smaller vessels in enforcing the blockade. The Venezuelan gunboat was seized during the blockade. The Germans took her into service as SMS "Restaurador" and put a crew from "Gazelle" on board under the command of "Kapitänleutnant" (Captain Lieutenant) Titus Türk. In February 1903 the Venezuelan government reached an agreement to pay its debts, concluding the confrontation. In January 1904, "Gazelle" conducted a goodwill visit to the port of New Orleans, along with "Vineta" and two other warships. During this period she was commanded by then "Korvettenkapitän" Reinhard Scheer, the later commander of the High Seas Fleet. 

After returning to Germany, she served with the High Seas Fleet until 1914, when she was reduced to a coastal defense vessel. She served in the Baltic Sea in the first two years after the outbreak of World War I in August 1914. On 17 November, while patrolling in the Baltic, "Gazelle" was attacked by the British submarine . The submarine fired a pair of torpedoes at the cruiser, but both missed. On the night of 25–26 January 1916, she struck Russian mines to the north of Cape Arkona. The mine explosion tore off both of her screws and she had to be towed back to port. On 22 February, the German Navy decided the old cruiser was not worth repairing, and so she was placed out of service. She was converted into a hulk for minelayers, first at Danzig and then at Cuxhaven. In 1918, she was moved to Wilhelmshaven. After the end of the war, "Gazelle" was formally stricken from the naval register on 28 August 1920 and broken up for scrap in Wilhelmshaven.



