Osvetnik-class submarine

The "Osvetnik"-class consisted of two submarines built by Ateliers et Chantiers de la Loire, Nantes, France, for the navy of the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes (later Yugoslavia). Launched in 1928–29, the vessels were named "Osvetnik" (Avenger) and "Smeli" (Daring) in Serbo-Croatian. They were built to a partial double hull Simonot design similar to the French . The "Osvetnik"-class was the second class of submarines to serve in the Royal Yugoslav Navy, and joined the two larger British-made "Hrabri"-class submarines to make up the pre-war Yugoslav submarine force. They were armed with six torpedo tubes, one gun, and one anti-aircraft gun, and could dive to .

Prior to World War II both submarines participated in cruises to Mediterranean ports. Both submarines were captured by Italian forces at the Bay of Kotor during the German-led Axis invasion of Yugoslavia in April 1941. After refit, they saw service as experimental and training vessels with the Regia Marina as "Francesco Rismondo" and "Antonio Bajamonti" respectively. They were both scuttled in September 1943 following the Italian surrender, "Francesco Rismondo" by the Germans following her capture, and "Antonio Bajamonti" by the Italians themselves.

Yugoslav naval policy in the interwar period lacked direction until the mid-1920s, although it was generally accepted that the Adriatic coastline was effectively a sea frontier that the naval arm was responsible for securing with the limited resources made available to it. In 1926, a modest ten-year construction program was initiated to build up a force of submarines, coastal torpedo boats, torpedo bombers and conventional bomber aircraft to perform this role. The "Osvetnik"-class submarines were one of the acquisitions aimed at developing a naval force capable of meeting this challenge.

The "Osvetnik"-class was built for the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes (later Yugoslavia) by the Ateliers et Chantiers de la Loire company (ACL) at Nantes, France. Their design was based on a partial double hull design developed by ACL's chief engineer, G. Simonot, which was similar to the French . Their Serbo-Croatian names of and translate as "Avenger" and "Daring" respectively. They had an overall length of , a beam of , and a surfaced draught of . Their surfaced displacement was , or submerged, and their crews consisted of 43 officers and enlisted men. They had an operational depth of .

They had two shafts driven by two MAN (Maschinenfabrik) diesel engines (when surfaced) or two Nancy electric motors (when submerged). The diesel engines were rated at and the electric motors at , and they were designed to reach a top speed of under diesel power while surfaced, and on their electric motors when submerged. They were armed with six torpedo tubes (four bow-mounted, two stern-mounted), one gun, and one anti-aircraft gun. They had a surfaced radius action of at , and at submerged.

"Smeli" was launched on 1 December 1928, and "Osvetnik" on 14 January 1929. They arrived in the Bay of Kotor on the southern Adriatic coast on 9 December 1929. In 1932, the British naval attaché reported that Yugoslav ships engaged in few exercises, manoeuvres or gunnery training due to reduced budgets.

First of the class, "Osvetnik" was involved in a series of visits to Mediterranean ports during the interwar period. She was captured in port by the Italians during the German-led Axis invasion of Yugoslavia. She was refitted and modernised before being commissioned by the Italians as "Francesco Rismondo", but was only used for training and experimentation. After the Italian surrender, she was captured then scuttled by the Germans in September 1943.

"Smeli" was the second and last of her class. She also participated in several cruises in the Mediterranean during the interwar period. After capture by the Italians, "Smeli" was refitted and modernised before being commissioned as "Antonio Bajamonti", but was only used for training and experimentation. She was scuttled by the Italians in September 1943 after the Italian surrender.




