SMS Erzherzog Ferdinand Max

SMS "Erzherzog Ferdinand Max" (German: "His Majesty's ship Archduke Ferdinand Max") was a pre-dreadnought battleship built by the Austro-Hungarian Navy in 1902. The second ship of the , she was launched on 21 May 1905. She was assigned to the III Battleship Division.

For most of World War I, "Erzherzog Ferdinand Max" remained in her home port of Pola, in present-day Croatia, except for four engagements. In 1914, she formed part of the Austro-Hungarian flotilla sent to protect the escape of the German ships SMS "Goeben" and SMS "Breslau" from the British-held Mediterranean; she advanced as far as Brindisi before being recalled to her home port. Her sole combat engagement occurred in late May 1915, when she participated in the bombardment of the Italian port city of Ancona. She also took part in suppressing a major mutiny among the crew members of several armored cruisers stationed in Cattaro between 1–3 February 1918. She also attempted to break through the Otranto Barrage in June of that year, but had to retreat when the dreadnought was sunk. After the war, "Erzherzog Ferdinand Max" was awarded to the United Kingdom as a war prize in 1920.

"Erzherzog Ferdinand Max" displaced . She was long, had a beam of and a draft of . She was manned by 700 men. She and her sisters were the last and largest pre-dreadnought class built by the Austro-Hungarian Navy, surpassing the by approximately . She was propelled by two two-shaft, four cylinder vertical triple expansion steam engines. On trials, they developed , which propelled the ship at a speed of .

"Erzherzog Ferdinand Max" carried a primary armament of four /40 caliber guns in two twin turrets on the centerline. These guns were an Austro-Hungarian replica of the German 24 cm/40 (9.4") Krupp C/94, which was used on the "Habsburg"s. Her secondary armament consisted of twelve /42 caliber guns, also made by Škoda, mounted in eight single casemates on either wing of the ship and two twin turrets on the centerline. shell at maximum elevation with a muzzle velocity of . The gun weighed 12.1 tons and could fire three rounds per minute.The ships had a tertiary armament for protection against torpedo boats in the form of the /45 caliber gun, also manufactured by Škoda. Anti-aircraft and airship protection was covered by the four Vickers anti-aircraft guns on the ship bought from Britain in 1910 and mounted onto "Erzherzog Karl". After 1916-17 refits two Škoda 7 cm L/45 BAG anti-aircraft guns were installed. "Erzherzog Ferdinand Max" was also fitted with two above water torpedo tubes, although rarely used.

At the outbreak of World War I, "Erzherzog Ferdinand Max" was in the III division of the Austrian-Hungarian battle-fleet. She was mobilized on the eve of the war along with the remainder of the fleet to support the flight of and . The two German ships were attempting to break out of Messina, which was surrounded by British troops, and make their way to Turkey. The breakout succeeded. When the flotilla had advanced as far south as Brindisi in south eastern Italy, the Austro-Hungarian ships were recalled. In company with other units of the Austro Hungarian navy, "Erzherzog Ferdinand Max" took a minor part in the bombardment of Ancona on 24 May 1915. There she and her sisters expended 24 rounds of 240 mm armor-piercing shells at signal and semaphore stations as well as 74 rounds of 190 mm shells aimed at Italian gun-batteries and other port installations.

A major mutiny among crews of the armored cruisers stationed in Cattaro, including and , began on 1 February 1918. Two days later, "Erzherzog Ferdinand Max" and her sisters arrived in the port and assisted with the suppression of the mutiny. Following the restoration of order in the naval base, the armored cruisers "Sankt Georg" and "Kaiser Karl VI" were decommissioned and "Erzherzog Ferdinand Max" and her sisters were stationed in Cattaro in their place. On the morning of 11 June, Admiral Miklós Horthy planned a major assault on the Otranto Barrage; the three "Erzherzog Karl"s and the four s were to provide support for the s on an assault on the Allied defenses at the Strait of Otranto. The plan was intended to replicate the success of the raid conducted one year earlier. Horthy's plan was to destroy the blockading fleet by luring Allied ships to the cruisers and lighter ships, which were protected from the heavier guns of the battleships, including the guns of the "Erzherzog Karl" class. However, on the morning of 10 June, the dreadnought was torpedoed and sunk by an Italian torpedo boat. Horthy felt that the element of surprise had been compromised, and therefore called off the operation. This was to be the last military action "Erzherzog Ferdinand Max" was to take part in, and she and her sisters spent the rest of their career in port.

Near the end of World War I, the "Erzherzog Karl"-class battleships were handed over to the newly formed State of Slovenes, Croats and Serbs but "Erzherzog Ferdinand Max" was later transferred to Great Britain as a war reparation. She was later broken up for scrap in 1921.




