SMS Preussen (1873)

SMS "Preussen"  was an armored frigate of the German Kaiserliche Marine. The ship was built by the AG Vulcan shipyard in Stettin in 1871–1876; she was commissioned into the fleet in July 1876. She was the first large warship of the German navy built by a private shipyard; all previous vessels had been ordered abroad or built by Royal or Imperial dockyards. Her main battery of four guns was mounted in a pair of twin gun turrets amidships.

"Preussen" served with the fleet from her commissioning until 1891, though she was frequently placed in reserve throughout her career. She cruised the Mediterranean Sea several times during her service, including during a mission in 1877 after unrest in the Ottoman Empire threatened German citizens living there. The ship was withdrawn from service at the end of 1891 and used as a harbor guard ship until 1896, when she was relegated to being a supply ship in Wilhelmshaven. She ended her career as a coal hulk for torpedo boats. In 1903, she was renamed "Saturn" so her name could be reused. The ship was ultimately sold to shipbreakers in 1919.

"Preussen" was ordered by the Imperial Navy from the AG Vulcan shipyard in Stettin; her keel was laid in 1871 under construction number 66. This was the first time a private German shipbuilder was given a contract to build a large warship for the navy. The ship was launched on 22 November 1873 and commissioned into the German fleet on 4 July 1876. "Preussen" cost the German government 7,303,000 gold marks. Although she was the third and final ship in her class to be laid down, she was the first to be launched and commissioned. This was because her two sisters, and , were built by newly established Imperial dockyards, while "Preussen" was built by an experienced commercial ship builder.

The ship was long overall and had a beam of and a draft of forward. "Preussen" was powered by one 3-cylinder single-expansion steam engine, which was supplied with steam by six coal-fired transverse trunk boilers. The ship's top speed was , at . She was also equipped with a full ship rig. Her standard complement consisted of 46 officers and 454 enlisted men.

She was armed with four L/22 guns mounted in a pair of gun turrets placed amidships. As built, the ship was also equipped with two L/25 chase guns. After being rebuilt in 1888–1890, her armament was increased by six and later ten L/30 quick-firing guns, a pair of machine guns, and five torpedo tubes, all submerged in the ship's hull. "Preussen"s armor was made of wrought iron and backed with teak. The armored belt was arrayed in two strakes. The upper strake was thick; the lower strake ranged in thickness from . Both were backed with of teak. The gun turrets were protected by armor on the sides, backed by 260 mm of teak.

After her commissioning in July 1876, "Preussen" served with the fleet. She joined a squadron sent to the Mediterranean Sea in 1877 in response to unrest in the Ottoman Empire related to the Russo-Turkish War; the violence threatened German citizens living there. The squadron, under the command of Rear Admiral Carl Ferdinand Batsch, steamed to the ports of Haifa and Jaffa in July 1877, but found no significant tensions ashore. Batsch then departed and cruised the Mediterranean for the remainder of the summer, returning to Germany in October.

In April 1878, "Preussen" participated in the fleet maneuvers, again under the command of Rear Admiral Batsch. By this time, she was joined by her two sister ships, "Friedrich der Grosse" and "Grosser Kurfürst". While steaming in the English Channel on 31 May, the armored frigate accidentally rammed "Grosser Kurfürst"; the latter quickly sank with the loss of 276 men. After assisting in the rescue attempt, "Preussen" escorted the damaged "König Wilhelm" to Portsmouth, where the Royal Navy made available a dry dock for emergency repairs. Albrecht von Stosch, the chief of the Kaiserliche Marine, ordered Rear Admiral Batsch and his staff to return to Germany immediately aboard "Preussen" and the dispatch vessel . The annual summer maneuvers for 1878 were canceled within a week of the sinking.

In May 1879, the armored squadron was reactivated, composed of "Preussen", her sister "Friedrich der Grosse", and the old armored frigates and . The annual summer training cruise was primarily conducted in just the Baltic Sea, apart from a short voyage in June to the coast of Norway. The four ships returned to Kiel in September, where they were demobilized for the winter. The new armored corvette replaced "Kronprinz" in the squadron in 1880. Wilhelm von Wickede, a former Austrian naval officer, replaced Batsch as the squadron commander. Again, the squadron remained in the Baltic for the summer cruise, with the exception of a short visit to Wilhelmshaven and Cuxhaven in August.

The summer cruise in 1881 followed the same pattern as the year previous, though "Kronprinz" returned in place of "Sachsen", which was plagued with engine problems. Wickede again served as the commander. In July, the ships hosted a visit by the British reserve squadron, which by this time included the first British ironclad, . "Preussen" and the rest of the squadron visited Danzig in September during a meeting between Kaiser Wilhelm I and the Russian Tsar Alexander III. The 1882 summer cruise included the same four ironclads from the previous year, and was again commanded by Wickede, who had by then been promoted to Rear Admiral. "Preussen" was kept in reserve during the annual summer maneuvers starting in 1883, as new ships, including the rest of the s entered service.

In August 1889, "Preussen" was reactivated to participate in Kaiser Wilhelm II's visit to Great Britain. The ship was assigned to the II Division, along with her sister "Friedrich der Grosse" and the central battery ironclads and , under command of Rear Admiral Friedrich Hollmann. The fleet then conducted maneuvers in the North Sea before returning to Germany. "Preussen" and the rest of the II Division became the training squadron for the fleet in 1889–1890, the first year the Kaiserliche Marine maintained a year-round ironclad force. The squadron escorted Wilhelm II's imperial yacht to the Mediterranean; the voyage included state visits to Italy and the Ottoman Empire. The squadron remained in the Mediterranean until April 1890, when it returned to Germany.
"Preussen" participated in the ceremonial transfer of the island of Helgoland from British to German control in the summer of 1890. She was present during the fleet maneuvers in September, where the entire eight-ship armored squadron simulated a Russian fleet blockading Kiel. The II Division, including "Preuseen", served as the training squadron in the winter of 1890–1891. The squadron again cruised the Mediterranean, under the command of Rear Admiral Wilhelm Schröder. "Preussen" saw one final round of fleet maneuvers with the II Division in 1891. She was removed from fleet duty to serve as a harbor guard ship at the end of 1891.

She was based in Wilhelmshaven as a harbor ship starting on 16 November 1896. She was renamed "Saturn" on 12 November 1903, so her name could be reused on the new battleship . The ship was formally stricken from the naval register on 21 May 1906. She was subsequently used as a coal hulk for torpedo boats. After being converted for this use, "Saturn" could hold up to of coal. She was eventually sold for scrapping on 27 June 1919 and broken up that year in Wilhelmshaven. Her figurehead is on display in the "Militärhistorisches Museum der Bundeswehr" in Dresden, while her bow ornament is located in the "Deutsches Museum" in Munich.

Notes

Citations



