Do Ya Thang (Rihanna song)

"Do Ya Thang" is a song by Barbadian recording artist Rihanna, taken from the deluxe edition of her sixth studio album, "Talk That Talk" (2011). It was written by Terius Nash and Rihanna herself, with production helmed by Nash under his stage-name The-Dream. "Do Ya Thang" is an R&B song with prominent influences of music from the 1980s. The song uses "catchy" drum breaks, synths and "funky" and "subtle" hook. Lyrically, it is a complimentary love track that contains "curse" words and a repetitive chorus.

"Do Ya Thang" received predominantly positive reviews from music critics, with many of them praising its composition and sound, while also linking it to Rihanna's previous works from her first studio album "Music of the Sun" (2005). Upon the release of "Talk That Talk", the song debuted on the lower regions of the singles charts in South Korea and the United Kingdom; at number 80 and 136 respectively. It also debuted on the UK R&B Chart at number 38.

"Do Ya Thang" was written by The-Dream and Rihanna. The-Dream produced the song. He also co-wrote two more songs on the album: its fourth single "Birthday Cake" and "Red Lipstick", with the latter also being featured on the deluxe edition of "Talk That Talk" (2011). Rihanna recorded "Do Ya Thang" at several recording studios during her worldwide Loud Tour (2011), including Pelican Hill, in Newport Coast, California and Studio De La Grande Armée in Paris, France. The song was mixed by Manny Marroquin while Erik Madrid and Chris Galland served as mixing assistants. The vocal production of "Do Ya Thang" was completed by Kuk Harrell and assisted by Jennifer Rosales.

"Do Ya Thang" is an R&B song with prominent influences of music from the 1980s. The song has a length of 3 minutes and 44 seconds. Shaun Kitchener of Entertainmentwise.com described the song as a "hip hop flavoured pop treat". "Do Ya Thang" uses "catchy" drum breaks, synths, "funky" and "subtle" hook that, according Gigwise's Edward Keeble, can be found on Rihanna's 2007 single "Umbrella" ("Good Girl Gone Bad", 2007), which was also co-written by Nash. Keeble further called the song a "modern classic". Emily Exton of Popdust noted the song's resemblance with the album's second single "You da One", "recorded over a loud '80s synth".

Lyrically, "Do Ya Thang" is a complimentary love song that contains "curse" words and a repetitive chorus. Robert Copsey of Digital Spy wrote that the song has a simple message evident in the lyrics, "At the end of the day you are who you are and I love you that way." Maz Halima of Flavour Magazine described the track as a "serene song". "Do Ya Thang" contains the line "And you my lover / But I love you like a brother" which, according to Popdust's Exton, is reminiscent of actress Angelina Jolie and her brother James Haven at the Oscars. Exton further explained that the song is full with vague descriptions of Rihanna's feelings, which result as "hollow" declaration that she is never going away. While singing the lines "Middle of the Day / Give Me What I want / It feels so special / It feels so good" she admits "liking afternoon delights".

According to Maz Hallima of Flavour Magazine, "Do Ya Thang" has a very "teenager-ish vibe" which according to her works well, however she is aware why Rihanna kept it as a bonus track of the album. Sam Lansky of MTV Buzzworthy wrote that the song "can't be beat for sheer likability". He further noted that Rihanna is stepping back from her "hypersexual persona to sing a more earnest, good-natured tune". Michael Jepson of "The Fourth State" concluded that "Do Ya Thang", together with "Cockiness (Love It)" and "Roc Me Out", are the top candidates from "Talk That Talk" that can be labeled as the album's "highlights". According to Jepson, all three songs are "blatantly raunchy" and feel like a follow up to Rihanna's 2011 single "S&M" ("Loud", 2011). Shaun Kitchener of EntertainmentWise concluded that Rihanna "takes a breather for 'Do Ya Thang', and we get a rare glimpse of Sweet Loving Rihanna instead."



Credits adapted from the liner notes of "Talk That Talk", Def Jam Recordings, SRP Records.

Upon the release of "Talk That Talk", due to digital downloads "Do Ya Thang" charted on the singles charts in South Korea and the United Kingdom. It debuted on the South Korea Gaon International Chart at number 80 on November 26, 2011, with sales of 6,288 digital copies. In the United Kingdom, "Do Ya Thang" debuted at number 38 on the UK R&B Chart on November 27, 2011. The song also debuted at number 136 on the UK Singles Chart for the chart issue dated December 3, 2011.


