Russian cruiser Admiral Makarov

Admiral Makarov was the second of the four armoured cruisers built for the Imperial Russian Navy during the mid-1900s. While initially assigned to the Baltic Fleet, the ship was detached to the Mediterranean several times before the start of World War I in 1914. She was modified to lay mines shortly after the war began. "Admiral Makarov" laid mines herself during the war and provided cover for other ships laying minefields. The ship fought several inconclusive battles with German ships during the war, including the Battle of Åland Islands in mid–1915. She also defended Moon Sound during the German invasion of the Estonian islands in late 1917. "Admiral Makarov" was decommissioned in 1918 and sold for scrap in 1922.

"Admiral Makarov" was long overall. She had a maximum beam of , a draught of and displaced . The ship had a crew of 568 officers and men. "Admiral Makarov" was named in honour of Admiral Stepan Makarov.

The ship had two vertical triple-expansion steam engines with a designed total of intended to propel the cruiser at . However, during sea trials, they developed and drove the ship to a maximum speed of . Steam for the engines was provided by 26 Belleville boilers. She could carry a maximum of of coal, although her range is unknown.

"Admiral Makarov"s main armament consisted of two 45-calibre guns in single-gun turrets fore and aft. Her eight guns were mounted in casemates on the sides of the ship's hull. Anti-torpedo boat defense was provided by twenty 50-calibre guns; eight of these were mounted in casemates on the side of the hull and in the superstructure. The remaining guns were located above the six-inch gun casemates in pivot mounts with gun shields. "Admiral Makarov" also mounted four Hotchkiss guns. The ship also had two submerged torpedo tubes, one on each broadside.

The ship used Krupp armour throughout. Her waterline belt was thick over her machinery spaces. Fore and aft, it reduced to . The upper belt and the casemates were thick. The armour deck was thick; over the central battery it was a single plate, but elsewhere it consisted of a plate over two plates. The gun turrets were protected by of armour and the conning tower had sides thick.

"Admiral Makarov" was built by Forges et Chantiers de la Méditerranée in La Seyne-sur-Mer, France. The ship was laid down in April 1905, and she was launched on 28 May 1906. "Admiral Makarov" was completed in April 1908. The ship sailed for the Baltic on 27 May and reached Tallinn, Estonia on 11 June where she was assigned to the Baltic Fleet. A few months later, she returned to the Mediterranean and provided assistance to the survivor of the Messina earthquake in December. The ship then rejoined the Baltic Fleet, but she was transferred back to Mediterranean in 1910 where she represented the Russian Empire, together with the battleship , the armored cruiser , and the protected cruiser , at the coronation of Nicholas I of Montenegro in August 1910. "Admiral Makarov" was back in the Baltic during 1911 and she made a port visit to Copenhagen in 1912. The following year, the ship was one of a group of cruisers that visited Brest, France, the Isle of Portland in Great Britain, and Stavanger, Norway.

When World War I began, "Admiral Makarov" was assigned to the First Cruiser Brigade. On 17 August, the ship, together with the armored cruiser , encountered two German light cruisers and an auxiliary minelayer near the entrance to the Gulf of Finland en route to lay a minefield at the entrance. The Russian commander refused combat because he mistakenly thought that the Germans had two additional armored cruisers with them. Shortly afterward, "Admiral Makarov" was modified to carry mines. She laid her first mines in early December when she was one of a group of ships that mined the northern and western entrances to the Gulf of Danzig. The following month, she provided cover as other cruisers laid minefields in the western Baltic Sea, near Bornholm and Rügen Islands on the night of 12 January 1915. On 13 February, the ship was en route to cover another minelaying sortie in the Gulf of Danzig, when "Rurik" ran aground in fog off Fårö Island. She was pulled off despite taking of water aboard, and "Admiral Makarov" escorted the damaged ship back home. Together with her sister and two protected cruisers, she fought a brief and inconclusive action with the light cruiser during the night of 6/7 May while covering a minelaying sortie off Libau.

On 2 July, the ship participated in the Battle of Åland Islands when intercepted and decoded wireless signals informed the Russians that a small German force was at sea to lay a minefield off the Åland Islands. Rear Admiral Mikhail Bakhirev was already at sea with "Admiral Makarov", "Bayan", "Rurik", the protected cruisers "Bogatyr" and , and the destroyer en route to bombard Memel. "Rurik" and "Novik" got separated from the others in fog, but the rest of the force encountered the light cruiser and a number of destroyers escorting the minelayer . The Russians concentrated on "Albatross", which was forced to run aground in Swedish territorial waters, while the faster "Augsburg" escaped to the south. The Russian cruisers were low on ammunition when they encountered two more German cruisers and broke off the action after exchanging fire.

When the German launched Operation Albion, the invasion of the Estonian islands of Saaremaa (Ösel), Hiiumaa (Dagö) and Muhu (Moon), on 11 October 1917, "Admiral Makarov" was in Finland, although she was assigned to the naval forces defending the Gulf of Riga. The ship arrived in Moon Sound on 14 October and engaged German destroyers attempting to enter the Sound from the west until ordered to withdraw on 19 October.

The Treaty of Brest-Litovsk required the Soviets to evacuate their base at Helsinki in March 1918 or have the ships based there interned by newly independent Finland even though the Gulf of Finland was still frozen over. "Admiral Makarov" was among the first group of ships that sailed on 25 March and reached Kronstadt five days later in what became known as the 'Ice Voyage'. She was paid off upon arrival and did not participate in the Russian Civil War. The ship was sold for scrap in 1922 and broken up in Stettin.




