2012–13 York City F.C. season

The 2012–13 season was the 91st season of competitive association football and 76th season in the Football League played by York City Football Club, a professional football club based in York, North Yorkshire, England. Their promotion via the Conference Premier play-offs in 2011–12 meant they played in League Two, after an eight-year absence from the Football League. The season ran from 1 July 2012 to 30 June 2013.

Manager Gary Mills signed eight players before the close of the summer transfer window. Having stood 14th in the league table on New Year's Day, York were on an 11-match run without a win when Mills was dismissed in March 2013. He was replaced by former Northern Ireland manager Nigel Worthington, who led York to safety from relegation on the final day of the season. Having won four of their last five matches, the team finished the season 17th in the table. They lost in their opening round matches in both the 2012–13 FA Cup and the League Cup, and were eliminated in the second round of the Football League Trophy.

36 players made at least one appearance in nationally organised first-team competition, and there were 12 different goalscorers. Goalkeeper Michael Ingham played in all 50 first-team matches over the season. Ashley Chambers finished as leading scorer with 10 goals, all scored in the league. The winner of the Clubman of the Year award, voted for by the club's supporters, was Daniel Parslow, who became the first player to win the award for a third time.

The 2011–12 season was Gary Mills' first full season as York City manager, having taken over the role in October 2010. York finished the season with two major trophies after victories in the 2012 FA Trophy Final and the 2012 Conference Premier play-off Final, both of which were staged at Wembley Stadium. The FA Trophy victory represented York's first piece of silverware in 19 years and was achieved with a 2–0 victory over York's Conference Premier rivals Newport County. With goals from Ashley Chambers and Matty Blair, York beat Luton Town 2–1 in the play-off final to return to the Football League after an eight-year absence with promotion to League Two.

Following the previous season's conclusion Moses Ashikodi, Matthew Blinkhorn, Eugen Bopp and Scott Brown were released, while James Meredith, Adriano Moké and Danny Pilkington departed for Bradford City, Cambridge United and Kidderminster Harriers respectively. Jon Challinor, Chambers, Chris Doig, Jamal Fyfield, Michael Ingham, Scott Kerr and Daniel Parslow signed new contracts with York. New players signed ahead of the start of the season were defender Danny Blanchett from Burton Albion, midfielders Lee Bullock from Bradford City, John McReady from Darlington 1883 and Jonathan Smith from Swindon Town, winger Michael Coulson from Grimsby Town and striker Oli Johnson from Oxford United. Midfielder Tom Platt, the previous season's youth-team captain and Youth Team Player of the Year, entered the first-team squad after agreeing a professional contract.

The team adopted new home and away kits, with the home kit featuring red shirts with white sleeves, light blue shorts and white socks. The away kit comprised light blue shirts with white sleeves, white shorts and light blue socks. This was accompanied by a change in shirt sponsor, with Benenden Health's name becoming present on the team kits.

York started the season away to League One club Doncaster Rovers in the first round of the League Cup. Debutant Coulson gave York the lead with a long-range strike in the 65th minute before Chris Brown equalised for Doncaster, scoring a penalty kick nine minutes later. The match finished 1–1 after extra time and York went on to lose the penalty shoot-out 4–2. York's Football League return ended in defeat, being beaten 3–1 at home to Wycombe Wanderers. Wycombe took a three-goal lead before Jason Walker scored York's consolation in the 54th minute. York recorded their first point of the season after drawing 2–2 away to Morecambe, with Chris Smith and Chambers scoring the team's goals in the second half. This was followed by their first league victory, with Parslow, Chambers and Coulson scoring in the first half away to Barnet in a 3–1 win. Two days before the transfer deadline York signed three new players; defender Clarke Carlisle and striker Scott Dobie signed on free transfers and Charlie Taylor came on loan from Leeds United.

Coulson scored after 15 seconds to give York the lead at home to league leaders Oxford United, and with further goals from Chambers and Paddy McLaughlin the team went on to win 3–1. York won 1–0 away in their first round match of the Football League Trophy against Rotherham United, with Blair scoring an 80th-minute winner. Walker's equaliser in the fifth minute of stoppage time secured a 2–2 draw at home to Chesterfield. There had been three goals scored in a five-minute period in the first half; Chesterfield opened the scoring through Sam Hird and Coulson equalised for York before Craig Westcarr restored the visitors' lead. York drew their next match 1–1 away to Exeter City, having taken the lead through Coulson in the 52nd minute before the home team equalised when John O'Flynn scored in the 83rd minute. The team's first away defeat of the season came with a 3–1 defeat away to Burton Albion; after McLaughlin gave York a ninth-minute lead, Burton went on to win with goals from Lee Bell, Calvin Zola and Matt Paterson. A third draw in four matches came after York drew 0–0 at home to Cheltenham Town. Platt and Liam Henderson were sent out to Harrogate Town and Gainsborough Trinity on three-month and one-month loans respectively, while Dobie was released and Taylor had his loan extended for a second month. York's run of four matches without victory came to an end after a 2–0 win away to Aldershot Town, with Blair and Walker scoring in the second half.

The previous season's Conference Premier champions Fleetwood Town defeated York 2–0 at home, with goals in each half scored by Junior Brown and Steven Gillespie. Peterborough United midfielder Daniel Kearns was signed on a one-month loan and made his debut as a substitute in York's 0–0 home draw with Rotherham. York were knocked out of the Football League Trophy in the second round after being beaten 4–0 at home by League One team Coventry City. Chambers scored the opening goal for York away to Bradford in the first derby match between the teams in 16 years, but with Bradford scoring through Zavon Hines the match finished a 1–1 draw. Chambers and Blair scored as York beat Dagenham & Redbridge 3–2 at home, which was the team's first win in four league matches. York recorded a second successive victory away to Accrington Stanley, with Walker scoring an 83rd-minute winner in a 1–0 win. Bullock was loaned out to Gateshead of the Conference Premier for a month, with his appearances in the team being limited. A 0–0 draw away to Southend United saw York's run of victories come to an end.

Coulson was ruled out for the season with a cruciate ligament injury, while Kearns' loan was extended for a further two months. York conceded an 80th-minute equaliser at home to AFC Wimbledon in the first round of the FA Cup, with Charlie Strutton the scorer, after substitute Jamie Reed had earlier given York the lead. Jonathan Smith was loaned to Conference Premier club Luton until January 2013, having not started a match since September 2012. Blair gave York the lead at home to Northampton Town, and despite playing most of the match with ten men, the away team equalised through Adebayo Akinfenwa. Winger Alex Rodman, who had previously played under Mills at Tamworth, was signed on a two-month loan from Aldershot. He made his debut in York's home league match against AFC Wimbledon, which finished as a 3–0 defeat, with the visitors scoring their goals in the second half.

York were knocked out of the FA Cup after a 4–3 extra time defeat away to AFC Wimbledon in a first round replay. Jamie Reed scored in the 89th minute to hand York a 2–2 draw away to Port Vale, after Rodman had scored his first goal for the club earlier in the second half. Carlisle was loaned to divisional rivals Northampton ahead of a permanent transfer in January 2013, while Henderson joined Gateshead on loan and Bullock had his loan extended. York fell to a second successive home defeat after being beaten 2–0 by Torquay United, the away team scoring in each half through Danny Stevens and Joe Oastler. Despite his loan earlier being extended until January 2013, Kearns was recalled by Peterborough, having made 12 appearances for York.

York recorded their first win in eight matches after defeating Rochdale 3–2 away, with Michael Potts scoring twice and Walker scoring once in the first half. Youth-team defender Tom Allan signed a one-and-a-half-year professional contract with the club, with Mills saying, "Tom has come on unbelievably in the last 12 months and thoroughly deserves his first professional contract". York fell to a 2–0 defeat away to Plymouth Argyle, with Fyfield scoring an own goal in the 45th minute and Nick Chadwick scoring in the 90th minute. Jonathan Smith and Bullock were recalled from their loans ahead of York's home match against Bristol Rovers. York scored four first half goals to beat Bristol Rovers 4–1, with Garry Kenneth scoring an own goal, Chambers scoring twice and Walker scoring once. A second successive away defeat came away to Chesterfield on Boxing Day when York were beaten 3–0, with the home team scoring their goals during the second half. This run ended after a 0–0 draw away to Fleetwood, in which York missed a number of chances to score in the first half.

Jonathan Smith made a permanent move to Luton for a fee of £50,000 shortly after the transfer window opened. York won 3–0 in their New Year's Day home fixture against Burton, with Walker, McLaughlin and Blair scoring. Carlisle completed a permanent transfer to Northampton after the conclusion of his loan, while Henderson signed for Gateshead permanently after an agreement was reached over the remainder of his York contract. York were beaten 2–1 at home to Exeter, with a Rodman own goal giving the visitors the lead in the 14th minute. Potts equalised for York five minutes later, before Exeter scored the winning goal on 53 minutes through Jimmy Keohane. Rodman's loan from Aldershot was extended until the end of the season. Walker scored in the 84th minute to secure York a 1–1 draw away to Cheltenham, who had taken the lead in the 67th minute through Shaun Harrad. Striker Ben Everson, who last played for Breiðablik in the Úrvalsdeild karla, was signed on a contract for the rest of the season. Platt was loaned out for the second time in a season, joining Conference North club F.C. Halifax Town for one month. Everson made his debut as a 71st-minute substitute in a 0–0 draw at home to Aldershot.

Blackburn Rovers defender Jack O'Connell was signed on a one-month loan, while Salford City defender Jameel Ible was signed on a contract for the rest of the season. Blanchett was released after his contract was cancelled by mutual consent. York were leading Gillingham 1–0 away before the home team equalised five minutes from time through Cody McDonald, with York having taken the lead in the 17th minute through a McLaughlin goal straight from a corner kick. Striker David McDaid was signed from League of Ireland Premier Division club Derry City on a one-and-a-half-year contract for a small compensation fee, while defender Curtis Obeng was signed on a one-month loan from Premier League club Swansea City after Lanre Oyebanjo was ruled out for around six weeks with a fractured skull.

York were beaten 4–1 at home to Morecambe, with Walker scoring York's only goal with a first half penalty, before enduring their largest defeat of the season after losing 4–0 away to Wycombe.<ref name="Results/matches: 2012/13"></ref> Jamie Reed was loaned to Cambridge United for the rest of the season, with his opportunities in the team limited. Burton midfielder John McGrath and Aldershot striker Michael Rankine were signed on loan, with the former joining for one month and the latter for the rest of the season. Both started in York's 0–0 draw at home to Gillingham. York opened the scoring against Barnet at home through a David Stephens own goal, although goals from Andy Yiadom and Jake Hyde saw the away team win 2–1. Everson was loaned out to Gateshead for a month, having struggled for opportunities in the team, and Platt returned to Harrogate on loan for the remainder of the season. York drew 0–0 away to Oxford, with the best chance of the match falling to Blair when he headed straight at goalkeeper Luke McCormick. O'Connell's loan was extended until the end of the season. Daniel Nardiello scored a stoppage-time equaliser for Rotherham when York were leading 1–0, after the away team had taken the lead through Blair earlier in the second half. Johnson was released after making seven appearances for the club, having been hindered during the season by stomach and groin problems.

Mills was dismissed after nearly two and a half years in charge on 2 March 2013 after York were beaten 2–0 at home to Bradford, with the team sitting four points above the relegation zone after an 11-match run without a win. Former Northern Ireland manager Nigel Worthington was appointed as his successor two days later, with Fred Barber joining from Bury as his assistant. Mills' remaining coaching staff of Darron Gee, Des Lyttle and Paul Musselwhite left the club. Following his appointment, Worthington indicated the players out on loan would return to the club, saying, "It's only right that contracted players should be in and around the club over the next 10 matches as York City are paying their salaries and they should be part of anything that is going on in the next two months". Worthington's first signing was Sheffield Wednesday goalkeeper Arron Jameson, who joined on an emergency loan for the remainder of the season, while McGrath had his loan extended until the end of the season.

Worthington's first match in charge was a 3–2 defeat away to AFC Wimbledon, in which Chris Smith scored twice, before Harry Pell scored the home team's winner in the 79th minute. York picked up their first point under Worthington after a 0–0 home draw with Rochdale, with both teams having few opportunities to score. Ipswich Town midfielder Josh Carson was signed on a one-month loan, while Bullock was loaned to Stockport County of the Conference Premier for the rest of the season. Carson made his debut in York's 2–0 home defeat to Port Vale, who scored in each half through Jennison Myrie-Williams and Lee Hughes. Former York striker Richard Cresswell, who became the club's record sale in 1999, was signed from Sheffield United on a one-month loan. He scored a penalty in the team's 2–1 defeat away to Torquay, a result that saw York drop into the second relegation spot. Sunderland midfielder Adam Reed was signed on a one-month loan, while Ible was released. Adam Reed made his debut as York drew 0–0 away to Bristol Rovers, in which the home team's goalkeeper Steve Mildenhall made a number of saves.

York recorded their first win in 17 matches after beating Plymouth 2–0 at home, with Chambers and Cresswell scoring in the first half. McGrath, Rankine and Rodman were sent back to their parent clubs, having become surplus to requirements under Worthington. The team were denied a second successive win after Peter Murphy scored a stoppage-time equaliser for Accrington, with the match finishing a 1–1 home draw, after Adam Reed had given York the lead in first half stoppage time. Carson and Kerr were ruled out for the remainder of the season through injury, with the former returning to parent club Ipswich after the expiration of his loan. York recorded a second victory in three matches after winning 2–0 away to Northampton, who had been on a run of ten consecutive home wins, with Chambers scoring in the first half and John Johnson scoring an own goal in the second half. This result saw York rise out of the relegation zone by moving up to 20th place in the table, having occupied 23rd place following the previous four results. Cresswell was recalled from his loan by new Sheffield United caretaker manager Chris Morgan, after making an important contribution for York in their battle against relegation.

York picked up a third win in five matches by defeating Southend 2–1 at home with first half goals from Adam Reed and Blair. They remained in 20th position in the league following positive results for most of the teams surrounding them, meaning their relegation fight would not be concluded until after the last match of the season. Before the Southend match Parslow was named Clubman of the Year, voted for by the York supporters, becoming the first player to win the award on three occasions. York avoided relegation on the final day of the season after beating Dagenham 1–0 away, with Chris Smith scoring the only goal. This meant York finished their first season back in the Football League in 17th place in League Two, four points clear of the relegation zone.

York spent most of the season in midtable, rising as high as seventh place in September 2012 and dropping as low as 23rd in March 2013. The team recorded the second lowest number of wins in the League Two season with 12; bottom-placed Aldershot were the only team to win fewer matches with 11 victories. Ingham was the only ever-present player for York, appearing in all 51 matches. Chambers was top scorer with 10 goals in the league, being the only player to reach double figures, and was followed by Walker with nine goals.

Ahead of the new season, York released Bullock, Challinor, Doig, Everson, Kerr, McDaid, McLaughlin, Potts, Jamie Reed and Walker, while Blair left to sign for Fleetwood. David McGurk, Oyebanjo, Parslow, Platt and Chris Smith signed new contracts with the club. The club signed goalkeeper Chris Kettings on loan from Blackpool, defender Ben Davies on loan from Preston North End, midfielders Craig Clay from Chesterfield and Lewis Montrose from Gillingham, winger Sander Puri from St Mirren and strikers Ryan Bowman from Hereford United, Cresswell from Sheffield United, Wes Fletcher from Burnley and Ryan Jarvis from Torquay. Defender Mike Atkinson and striker Chris Dickinson entered the first-team squad from the youth team after agreeing professional contracts.

League positions are sourced by Statto, while the remaining information is referenced individually.



