Moonshine (Bruno Mars song)

"Moonshine" is a song by American singer-songwriter Bruno Mars for his second studio album "Unorthodox Jukebox" (2012). It was written by Bruno Mars, Philip Lawrence, Ari Levine, Andrew Wyatt, Jeff Bhasker and Mark Ronson who also served as its producer along with the former three, under their alias, The Smeezingtons, and Bhasker. "Moonshine" is a midtempo pop, power pop and R&B record. In addition to be heavily influenced by quiet storm and dance-pop styles, as well as, presenting a "disco groove". Development of "Moonshine" began while Mars, Ronson and Bhasker "went out one night" and drunk moonshine all night long. When they returned to the studio they started jamming, while Mars screamed "Moonshine, take us to the stars!".

The song was released as the second promotional single on November 19, 2012. It was set to be issued on contemporary hit radio as the fourth single of the album in Europe and South America, as announced by Brazilian Warner Music Group in their official website. However, it was replaced by "Gorilla", which had already been released in the United States and Oceania at the time. Commercially, "Moonshine" charted only in South Korea, where it reached number 17, along with the release of its parent album. It eventually charted in both Belgium charts in 2013, peaking at number 30 on the Ultratop 50 Flanders and Ultratip Wallonia, a component of the Ultratop 50 Wallonia at number four. On the following year, it debuted in France, spending 11 weeks on the chart, Netherlands and Poland, during the month of January, peaking at number 117, 32 and 11, respectively.

It received generally favorable reviews from music critics, who compared its composition to the works of Michael Jackson, Prince and Madonna. Musically, the track has a "retro" vibe, which is noted on the "flanged guitar notes", "moody chord progressions" and "cheesy flecks of synthesizer". Its lyrics, had different interpretations with some using its denotative meaning, saying that Mars tries to escape "to ecstasy in a bottle of his favorite vice", while others took a connotative approach by writing that "Moonshine" is about "longing for the high water mark of a relationship", which becomes "impossible to reach". The track was performed on the Moonshine Jungle Tour (2013-2015) as the opening act.

During an interview, with "Rolling Stone", Mars explained the origin of "Moonshine", by saying "We all [Mars, Ronson and Bhasker] went out one night, and they had actual moonshine on the menu. We drank it all night, then headed to the studio – Jeff got on keyboards, Mark starts playing electronic drums that sound like Eighties Prince and I started screaming, 'Moonshine, take us to the stars!' There were a lot of nights like that".

"Moonshine" was written by Bruno Mars, Philip Lawrence, Ari Levine, Andrew Wyatt, Jeff Bhasker and Mark Ronson. Mars, Lawrence, and Levine, Bhasker and Ronson were in charge of the production. The song was recorded by Levine, with additional engineering by Charles Moniz. The guitar was played by Wyatt and Ronson, the latter also handled the bass and other beats, while the former contributed with backing vocals along with Bhasker. The lead singer performs the keyboards on the recording. The mixing of the track was done at Larrabee Sound Studios in North Hollywood by Manny Marroquin. It was mastered by David Kutch at The Mastering Place.

Upon the song lifting, Mars tweeted "Ive been jammin to this song for a while now. I hope yall can groove wit me and slide wit me but most important BOK wit me #Moonshine". "Moonshine" was released digitally as a promotional single in the United States on November 19, 2012 as part of the iTunes countdown through Atlantic Records. In countries outside of the US it as liberated by Warner Entertainment Group on the same date. It was announced on the Brazilian website of Warner Music Group that the track was set to be released on contemporary hit radio as a single on October 25, 2013 in Europe and South America, while "Gorilla" had been sent to United States and Oceania mainstream radio. Nevertheless, it was replaced by Gorilla as the fourth single.

A remix of the song, made by The Futuristics (Alex Schwartz and Joe Khajadourian), was exclusively released as bonus track on the Target edition of the album, on December 11, 2012. Almost a year later, on November 5, 2013, the remix of the song was also included on the deluxe edition of the album, released worldwide.

"Moonshine" has a length of three minutes and forty-nine seconds. It has been described as a midtempo pop, power pop, and R&B song. Critics noticed being heavily influenced by quiet storm and dance-pop style, while having a "disco groove", as well as, having a "retro" and "slightly ’80s-informed" vibe. Mitchell Peters, while writing the "Billboard" cover story where Mars was featured, called "Moonshine" a "sexed-up rocker" According to the sheet music published at Music Notes, the recording is composed in the key of A minor with a time signature in common time, and a moderate groove of 104 beats per minute. Mars's vocals range spans from the note of C to E♭. As the track progresses "flanged guitar notes and moody chord progressions" can be heard with "cheesy flecks of synthesizer". The song lope is "amusing Simple Minds-like" and its chorus is similar to 'Heartbeat' by Don Johnson. A bass guitar, drums and additional beats are also part of its instrumentation.

The subject addressed in the recording lyrics has led "Spin"s critic, Chris Martins, to become "slightly disappointed" when he realized that "the song was not, in fact, an ode to bootleg liquor", but a "longing for the high water mark of a relationship that now seems impossible to reach", despite the fact that "Mars’ lyrics intoxicate in their own way". Brittany Spanos of "Rolling Stone" found the lyrics to "compares a woman to the distilled liquor", as Mars tries to recreate the "magic" when they were together the last time. The recording's composition brought attention due to its similarities to the works of Michael Jackson. Martins of "Spin" stated that the track finds Mars channeling "the King of Pop with a markedly more reverent aplomb". Sam Lansky of Idolator concurred, writing that the artist is channeling "80's pop icon: Michael Jackson". Nevertheless, Lansky discovered a "a little bit of Prince in there", as well, "but Mars’ vocals sound eerily like Jacko in his prime". The song has drawn comparisons to Daft Punk due to its "disco groove", with Sarah Rodman from "The Boston Globe" calling the it "wistful" and "Los Angeles Times" Mikael Wood called it "conflict-free tune" gritting with "desperation". Mars said that the primary influence for the track was American musician Prince.

The song has received generally favorable reviews from critics, who couldn't help to avoid comparisons between the track and Michael Jackson's work. Chris Martins of "Spin" called the recording "wonderfall', stating that was something that "Mars might say". He also wrote that the track was an "80's-informed backing track". Sam Lanksy of Idolator praised the track, saying "fortunately" the drinking during the recording sections "paid off on the song" since it "is probably our favorite effort from Mars to date". Tina Jamias from AXS.com recommended, "Watch the turning point of an 80s movie and listen to "Moonshine". Perfect match". Having previously stated "The '80s are revisited in "Moonshine" with Mars taking on the sounds and styles of Michael Jackson and Madonna". Jason Lipshut of "Billboard" wrote that "The production is so buttery that the listener can't help but get another sugar rush". Joe DeAndrea of the same publication, while reviewing Mars' 5 Best Deep Cuts, opined "one of the most eclectic songs Mars has ever delivered...with a retro pop feel and a slight disco vibe to it, Mars unleashes a dose of musical ecstasy."

In a mixed review, Jon Caramanica of "New York Times" called it "melodramatic and spry", furthering "the song feels bigger than the contours Mr. Mars can give it. It demands a yowler. It could use Adam Lambert".

Following the release of "Unorthodox Jukebox" in 2012, "Moonshine" debuted at number 17 on the South Korea International Download Chart, with 11, 360 copies sold. In 2013, the track entered in the Ultratop 50 Flanders chart, debuting at its peak position 30. Around the same time, it also appeared on the Ultratip Wallonia, a chart that depends on both airplay and sales, peaking at number 4. On January 4, 2014, it debuted at number one on the Tipparade in Netherlandes. On the following week, the song entered the Dutch Top 40 and eventually it peaked at number 32. During the month of January, it also charted on the French single charts, spending 11 weeks, peaking at number 117 in its fourth week; and in Poland, it peaked at number 11.





Credits adapted from the liner notes of "Unorthodox Jukebox", Atlantic Records.



