Bullet Club

, sometimes shortened to BC, is a professional wrestling stable primarily appearing in the Japanese promotion New Japan Pro-Wrestling (NJPW). In the United States, the group appears most notably in Ring of Honor (ROH).

The group was formed in May 2013, when Irish wrestler Prince Devitt betrayed his Japanese partner Ryusuke Taguchi and came together with American wrestler Karl Anderson and Tongan wrestlers Bad Luck Fale and Tama Tonga to form a villainous stable of foreigners, which they subsequently named Bullet Club. Before the end of the year, the stable was also joined by three other Americans, The Young Bucks (Matt and Nick Jackson) and Doc Gallows. Wrestlers from the Mexican Consejo Mundial de Lucha Libre (CMLL) promotion have also worked tours of NJPW as members of Bullet Club, which led to the formation of an offshoot group named Bullet Club Latinoamerica in CMLL in October 2013. At the end of 2013, Bullet Club held both the IWGP Junior Heavyweight and IWGP Junior Heavyweight Tag Team Championships while also having conquered three of NJPW's five annual tournaments. The stable marked a major turning point for the career of Devitt, a longtime fan favorite, who began his ascent out of the junior heavyweight division and into the IWGP Heavyweight Championship picture.

In April 2014, Devitt left NJPW and was replaced in Bullet Club by American wrestler A.J. Styles. The following month, Bullet Club received its first Japanese member when Yujiro Takahashi joined and helped Styles capture the IWGP Heavyweight Championship. The following June, members of Bullet Club also won the IWGP Intercontinental and NEVER Openweight Championships, meaning that the stable had now held all titles NJPW had to offer. When NJPW added a seventh title (the NEVER Openweight 6-Man Tag Team Championship) at the start of 2016 and an eighth title (the IWGP United States Championship) in July 2017, Bullet Club quickly won them as well. To date, they are the first of two stables (the other being Chaos) to have won every championship available in NJPW. They have also held every currently active male championship in ROH (World, TV, World Tag Team and Six-Man). The stable continued adding members, most notably Canadian wrestler Kenny Omega, who took over its leadership in early 2016 when Styles, Anderson and Gallows all left NJPW. After a split between The Elite and OG factions within the stable, Omega, Cody, Marty Scurll, Adam Page and The Young Bucks quietly left the faction in October 2018 and Jay White took over as its fifth leader.

Bullet Club was conceived by New Japan Pro-Wrestling (NJPW) in early 2013, following a positive fan response to a storyline, where Prince Devitt turned on his longtime tag team partner Ryusuke Taguchi to form a villainous partnership with Bad Luck Fale. Originally, Devitt and Fale were scheduled to go on as a duo, but the storyline was altered with them instead coming together with Karl Anderson and Tama Tonga to form an all-"gaijin" (foreigner) stable. Devitt came up with the name Bullet Club, which was in reference to his finger gun hand gesture and "Real Shooter" nickname and Anderson's nickname, "The Machine Gun". In naming the group, Devitt has stated that he specifically did not want the word "the" in front of the name or a name consisting of just three letters. Other names considered for the group included Bullet Parade and Bullet League. As of May 2016, the Bullet Club trademark is owned by NJPW. Behind the scenes, the four founding members of Bullet Club were best friends and travel partners.

The group has been compared to the World Championship Wrestling (WCW) stable New World Order (nWo). As a way of paying homage to the nWo, members of Bullet Club began using the stable's signature "Too Sweet" hand gesture. The gesture, also known as the "Turkish Wolf", had supposedly been used by Anderson and Devitt behind the scenes since 2006. In March 2015, WWE filed a trademark application for the hand gesture. Some, including Matt and Nick Jackson, suggested this was done due to Bullet Club's popularity. The application was ultimately abandoned by WWE. In August 2015, after Devitt had joined WWE as Finn Bálor, WWE released Bálor Club merchandise playing off Bullet Club. WWE recognized Bullet Club in the first week of January 2016, when discussing rumors about members of the stable joining the promotion, preceding A.J. Styles' debut in the WWE as a 2016 Royal Rumble contestant. In April 2016, the former Bullet Club tag team of Gallows and Anderson debuted for WWE, with their NJPW background again being acknowledged by the company, eventually forming The Club with Styles. On September 25, 2017, Bullet Club appeared outside WWE's "Raw" show in Ontario, California, spoofing a segment from 1998 where D-Generation X "invaded" WCW's "Nitro". Afterwards, WWE sent members of the stable a cease and desist letter, claiming they were using the company's intellectual property, specifically the Too Sweet hand gesture, leading to merchandise featuring the gesture being pulled from stores. WWE writer Jimmy Jacobs was let go by the company for posting a photo on Instagram with members of Bullet Club, taken during the mock invasion.

nWo's founding member Kevin Nash has praised Bullet Club as a more athletic version of the nWo, stating that there is mutual respect between the two stables, and informally passing the torch from his stable to Bullet Club. Jeff Jarrett, who has represented both Bullet Club and nWo, has named in-ring ability as the main difference between the two stables, stating "Bullet Club is off the charts bell to bell more talented". Former NJPW wrestler and current WWE trainer Matt Bloom has stated that Bullet Club's popularity helped the promotion become global.

Bullet Club's matches often involve excessive outside interference, ref bumps and other tactics, which are more common in American professional wrestling and are rarely seen in Japanese "puroresu", even in matches involving other villainous acts. This disregard for Japanese traditions and culture got the stable over as a top act. Bullet Club has garnered a substantial amount of worldwide popularity, especially among American professional wrestling fans. As of March 2016, the stable's original Bone Soldier shirt was the top selling shirt on the Pro Wrestling Tees store, outselling all top independent wrestlers and WWE veterans that are affiliated with the site. In 2017, Bullet Club shirts were made available at Hot Topic stores, where they also became big sellers, supposedly selling 100,000 copies in the first three months. Hot Topic executives reportedly became aware of Bullet Club after seeing the large number of the stable's shirts being worn by fans at WWE's WrestleMania 33. WWE then had to "awkwardly" tell the executives that the shirt was not one of theirs. Bullet Club's popularity in the United States has led to members of the stable working as fan favorites at events held in the country.

As Bullet Club is owned by NJPW, all wrestlers joining the stable, including those who have joined at Ring of Honor (ROH) events, have to be approved by NJPW booker Gedo.

On February 3, 2013, IWGP Junior Heavyweight Champion Prince Devitt pinned IWGP Heavyweight Champion Hiroshi Tanahashi in a tag team match, where he and Karl Anderson faced Tanahashi and Devitt's longtime Apollo 55 tag team partner Ryusuke Taguchi. This led to a match between Devitt and Tanahashi on March 3 at NJPW's 41st anniversary event. Though neither man's title was on the line in the match, Tanahashi vowed to relinquish the IWGP Heavyweight Championship in case Devitt was victorious. After defeating Devitt, Tanahashi went to help his opponent up, but was pushed away by the disappointed Junior Heavyweight Champion. The following weeks, Devitt began portraying a more cocky and villainous persona, regularly disrespecting both partners and opponents, with the exception of Ryusuke Taguchi, whom he tried to get to go along with his new attitude. However, this changed on April 7 at the Invasion Attack pay-per-view, when Devitt turned on Taguchi, after the two had failed to recapture the IWGP Junior Heavyweight Tag Team Championship from the Time Splitters (Alex Shelley and Kushida). During the attack, Devitt was helped by the returning King Fale, who attacked not only Taguchi, but also Shelley, Kushida and Captain New Japan, whom Devitt then proceeded to unmask. Following the attack, Devitt took a microphone, introduced Fale as his new "bouncer", giving him the new name "The Underboss" Bad Luck Fale and dubbed himself the "Real Rock 'n' Rolla". At the following pay-per-view, Wrestling Dontaku 2013 on May 3, Devitt and Fale teamed up for the first time to defeat Taguchi and Captain New Japan in a tag team match. Later in the event, Devitt and Fale entered the ring to attack the now former IWGP Heavyweight Champion Hiroshi Tanahashi, after he had defeated Karl Anderson in a singles match. Anderson first went to stop Devitt and Fale, but then turned on Tanahashi, hitting him with the "Gun Stun". As the three men continued their attack on Tanahashi, they were also joined by Tama Tonga, with whom Anderson had formed a partnership during the past two weeks. In a post-match interview, the four men announced the formation of an all-"gaijin" stable named "Bullet Club".
The four members of Bullet Club wrestled their first match together on May 22, when they defeated Captain New Japan, Hiroshi Tanahashi, Manabu Nakanishi and Ryusuke Taguchi in an eight-man tag team match. Two days later, Devitt entered the 2013 Best of the Super Juniors tournament, where he won his block with a clean record of eight wins and zero losses, advancing to the knockout stage on June 9, where he first defeated Kenny Omega in the semifinals and then Alex Shelley in the finals to win the tournament, after which he proceeded to challenge Hiroshi Tanahashi. Devitt's old tag team partner Ryusuke Taguchi had originally earned a spot in the semifinals of the tournament, but a legitimate hip injury forced him to pull out. During the following day's press conference, Devitt also mentioned a move to the heavyweight division, aiming to become the first wrestler to hold the IWGP Junior Heavyweight and IWGP Heavyweight Championships simultaneously. On June 22 at Dominion 6.22, Devitt defeated Tanahashi, again following interference from the rest of the Bullet Club, to earn his first-ever shot at the IWGP Heavyweight Championship. The reigning champion, Kazuchika Okada, accepted Devitt's challenge for the title later in the event on the condition that he first defend the IWGP Junior Heavyweight Championship against his Chaos stablemate Gedo. Bullet Club's feud with Tanahashi continued at the July 5 Kizuna Road 2013 pay-per-view, where Tama Tonga and visiting Mexican wrestler Terrible lost the Consejo Mundial de Lucha Libre (CMLL) World Tag Team Championship to Tanahashi and Jyushin Thunder Liger. Terrible worked also the rest of his two-week NJPW tour as a member of Bullet Club. After successfully defending his IWGP Junior Heavyweight Championship against Gedo, Devitt received his match for the IWGP Heavyweight Championship on July 20, but was defeated by Okada, despite interference from the rest of Bullet Club. From August 1 to 11, both Devitt and Anderson took part in the 2013 G1 Climax, wrestling in separate round-robin blocks. During the tournament, Devitt picked up big wins, albeit through outside interference, over reigning IWGP Heavyweight Champion Kazuchika Okada and former champions Hiroshi Tanahashi, Satoshi Kojima and Togi Makabe, but failed to advance from his block. Meanwhile, Anderson entered the final day with a chance to reach the finals, but a loss against Tetsuya Naito eliminated him from the tournament. On September 5, Rey Bucanero, another CMLL wrestler, started a NJPW tour working as a member of Bullet Club. On September 14, the rest of Bullet Club helped Bucanero and Tama Tonga defeat Hiroshi Tanahashi and Jyushin Thunder Liger for the CMLL World Tag Team Championship. The rivalry between Devitt and Tanahashi culminated in a Lumberjack Deathmatch on September 29 at Destruction, where Tanahashi was victorious.
On October 11, Tonga and Bucanero returned to CMLL, where they formed "Bullet Club Latinoamerica" with CMLL World Heavyweight Champion Terrible and female wrestler and manager La Comandante. However, a week later, Tonga and Bucanero were stripped of the CMLL World Tag Team Championship, when they were unable to defend the title against La Máscara and Rush due to Bucanero being sidelined with an injury. On October 25, American tag team The Young Bucks (Matt Jackson and Nick Jackson) made their NJPW debut as the newest members of Bullet Club by entering the 2013 Super Jr. Tag Tournament. In early November, The Young Bucks first defeated the Forever Hooligans (Alex Koslov and Rocky Romero) in the finals to win the tournament, and then Suzuki-gun (Taichi and Taka Michinoku) to become the new IWGP Junior Heavyweight Tag Team Champions. On November 11, NJPW announced the participating teams in the 2013 World Tag League. In the tournament, Bullet Club would be represented by two teams in separate blocks; Devitt and Fale in block A and Anderson and the debuting American Doc Gallows in block B. On December 7, both teams entered the final day of the round-robin portion of the tournament with a chance to advance to the semifinals. Anderson and Gallows won their block with a record of four wins and two losses by defeating NWA World Tag Team Champions The IronGodz (Jax Dane and Rob Conway), while Devitt and Fale were eliminated with a record of three wins and three losses, after losing to Captain New Japan and Hiroshi Tanahashi, who had lost all their other matches in the tournament. The following day, Anderson and Gallows first defeated Togi Makabe and Tomoaki Honma in the semifinals and then Hiroyoshi Tenzan and Satoshi Kojima in the finals to win the tournament. This led to a match on January 4, 2014, at Wrestle Kingdom 8, where they defeated K.E.S. (Davey Boy Smith Jr. and Lance Archer) to win the IWGP Tag Team Championship. During the same event, Devitt lost the IWGP Junior Heavyweight Championship to Kota Ibushi, ending his fourteen-month reign.
February's The New Beginning tour featured Bullet Club defending both of their tag team championships and the re-ignition of a rivalry between Devitt and his former partner Ryusuke Taguchi, who returned from an eight-month injury break. Devitt dominated his encounters with Taguchi for most of the tour, including pinning him in his return eight-man tag team match on February 2, but at the tour ending event, The New Beginning in Osaka, Taguchi pinned his former partner in a tag team match, where he teamed with Togi Makabe and Devitt with Fale. In March, Bad Luck Fale made it to the finals of the 2014 New Japan Cup, but was defeated there by Shinsuke Nakamura. As the one-year anniversary of the break-up of Apollo 55 approached, the rivalry between Devitt and Taguchi escalated, leading to Taguchi challenging his rival to a Loser Leaves Town match. The stipulation, however, was never made official for their April 6 Invasion Attack 2014 match. During the match, Devitt got into an argument with The Young Bucks, after the two repeatedly interfered in the match despite his orders not to do so. This led to The Young Bucks turning on Devitt, who responded by diving onto his Bullet Club stablemates. After Taguchi defeated Devitt, the two men shook hands, ending their rivalry with each other and Devitt's association with Bullet Club. Devitt's resignation from NJPW was announced the following day.

Later at Invasion Attack 2014, American wrestler A.J. Styles debuted as the newest member of Bullet Club, attacking IWGP Heavyweight Champion Kazuchika Okada. Styles, who knew Okada from their days working together for the Total Nonstop Action Wrestling (TNA) promotion, claimed that Okada was still the same "young boy" (rookie) he had known in TNA and asserted himself as the next challenger for his title. Following Invasion Attack 2014, with Styles still working a full schedule on the American independent circuit and only booked to work NJPW's larger events, Anderson was positioned as the new leader of Bullet Club. However, Styles was considered the leader of the ROH version of Bullet Club, a role which was also given to him by NJPW by the end of 2015. Styles, however, has maintained that he was never the leader as, according to him, the group "[did not] follow anybody". On May 3 at Wrestling Dontaku 2014, Styles defeated Okada to become the new IWGP Heavyweight Champion, when Yujiro Takahashi turned on Okada and the Chaos stable and jumped to Bullet Club, becoming its first Japanese member. With Bullet Club capturing NJPW's top title, while also holding both of its tag team titles, and adding new members, this was billed as a "rebirth" for the stable, which was celebrating its one-year anniversary during the event.

Later in the month, Bullet Club took part in NJPW's North American tour, produced in collaboration with ROH. The Young Bucks, who entered the tour as both the IWGP Junior Heavyweight and ROH World Tag Team Champions, lost the latter title to reDRagon (Bobby Fish and Kyle O'Reilly) on May 17, ending their two-month reign in their first defense. Meanwhile, their seven-month reign as the IWGP Junior Heavyweight Tag Team Champions ended on June 21 at Dominion 6.21, where they were defeated by the Time Splitters in their sixth defense. Later that same event, Bad Luck Fale defeated Shinsuke Nakamura to become the new IWGP Intercontinental Champion. On June 29, Yujiro Takahashi brought another title over to the Bullet Club, when he defeated Tomohiro Ishii with help from his stablemates for the NEVER Openweight Championship. With the win, Bullet Club had won every title in NJPW, now simultaneously holding all four of its heavyweight titles.
From July 21 to August 8, five members of Bullet Club took part in the 2014 G1 Climax with Fale and Gallows wrestling in block A and Anderson, Styles and Takahashi in block B. All five failed to advance from their blocks with Fale finishing third and Gallows ninth in their block of eleven and Styles finishing second, Anderson third and Takahashi tied sixth in their block. Styles was eliminated due to losing to block winner Okada in their head-to-head match. On August 10, Global Force Wrestling (GFW) founder Jeff Jarrett joined Bullet Club, attacking Hiroshi Tanahashi after he had defeated Styles in a non-title match. On September 21 at Destruction in Kobe, Fale lost the IWGP Intercontinental Championship back to Shinsuke Nakamura in his first defense. Bullet Club lost their two remaining singles titles on October 13 at King of Pro-Wrestling with Takahashi losing the NEVER Openweight Championship back to Tomohiro Ishii in his second title defense, while in the main event Styles lost the IWGP Heavyweight Championship to Hiroshi Tanahashi in his third defense, after Jeff Jarrett's outside interference was stopped by the returning Yoshitatsu (Jarrett would leave the faction shortly after).

On November 8 at Power Struggle, Kenny Omega, who had joined NJPW at the beginning of the month, became the newest member of Bullet Club, challenging Ryusuke Taguchi to a match for the IWGP Junior Heavyweight Championship. Omega had earlier dismissed the idea of joining Bullet Club as he did not consider himself a "gaijin" after six years of living in Japan, but now claimed he had lied and only wanted money and the title. Refusing to speak Japanese despite being fluent in the language, Omega dubbed himself "The Cleaner" with the idea of him being there to "clean up" the junior heavyweight division. From November 22 to December 5, three Bullet Club teams took part in the 2014 World Tag League; Anderson and Gallows and Styles and Takahashi in block A and Fale and Tonga in block B. Anderson and Gallows won their block with a record of five wins and two losses, while Styles and Takahashi finished close behind with four wins and three losses. Styles and Takahashi were victorious over the reigning IWGP Tag Team Champions in the head-to-head match between the Bullet Club teams, but were left behind them in the final standings due to losing to Okada and Yoshi-Hashi on the final day. Meanwhile, Fale and Tonga finished at the bottom of their block with a record of three wins and four losses. On December 7, Anderson and Gallows were defeated in the finals of the tournament by Hirooki Goto and Katsuyori Shibata.
On January 4, 2015, at Wrestle Kingdom 9, Omega, in his first match as a member of Bullet Club, defeated Ryusuke Taguchi to become the new IWGP Junior Heavyweight Champion, while Anderson and Gallows lost the IWGP Tag Team Championship to Goto and Shibata, ending their year-long reign in their seventh defense. The following day, Cody Hall, the son of nWo founding member Scott Hall, joined Bullet Club as the stable's personal "young boy" with Anderson stating that he would have to earn his spot as a full-fledged member. Later that month, NJPW relaunched Bullet Club Latin America in time for the "Fantastica Mania 2015" tour, co-produced by NJPW and CMLL. On January 18, during the fifth day of "Fantastica Mania 2015", CMLL wrestler Mephisto joined Bullet Club, prior to successfully defending his Mexican National Light Heavyweight Championship against Stuka Jr. On February 11 at The New Beginning in Osaka, The Young Bucks regained the IWGP Junior Heavyweight Tag Team Championship by defeating defending champions reDRagon and Time Splitters in a three-way match. Later that same event, Anderson and Gallows regained the IWGP Tag Team Championship from Goto and Shibata, while in the main event A.J. Styles defeated Hiroshi Tanahashi to also bring the IWGP Heavyweight Championship back to Bullet Club. Both of Bullet Club's tag team championship reigns ended in their first title defenses on April 5 at Invasion Attack 2015 with The Young Bucks being defeated by Roppongi Vice (Beretta and Rocky Romero) and Anderson and Gallows by the ROH tag team The Kingdom (Matt Taven and Michael Bennett).

The Young Bucks regained the title on May 3 at Wrestling Dontaku 2015 in a three-way match with Roppongi Vice and reDRagon. Also during the event, Bullet Club was involved in the first NJPW match to feature female wrestlers in over twelve years, where Karl Anderson, Doc Gallows and his wife Amber Gallows were defeated by Maria Kanellis, Matt Taven and Michael Bennett in a six-person intergender tag team match. On July 5 at Dominion 7.5 in Osaka-jo Hall, Kenny Omega lost the IWGP Junior Heavyweight Championship to the 2015 Best of the Super Juniors winner Kushida in his fourth defense, while Anderson and Gallows defeated Bennett and Taven in a rematch to win the IWGP Tag Team Championship for the third time. In the main event, Styles lost the IWGP Heavyweight Championship to Kazuchika Okada in his second defense. From July 20 to August 15, five members of Bullet Club took part in the 2015 G1 Climax with Fale, Gallows and Styles in block A and Anderson and Takahashi in block B. Both Styles and Anderson entered their last round-robin matches with a chance to advance to the finals, but were eliminated after losing to Hiroshi Tanahashi and Satoshi Kojima, respectively. On August 16, The Young Bucks lost the IWGP Junior Heavyweight Tag Team Championship to reDRagon in their second defense. From September 4 to 6, Styles and The Young Bucks represented Bullet Club in American promotion Chikara's 2015 King of Trios tournament, where they made it to the finals, before losing to Team AAA (Aero Star, Drago and Fénix). On September 23 at Destruction in Okayama, Omega defeated Kushida, following outside interference from Anderson, to regain the IWGP Junior Heavyweight Championship. On October 23, Chase Owens became the newest member of Bullet Club.

On January 4, 2016, at Wrestle Kingdom 10, The Young Bucks regained the IWGP Junior Heavyweight Tag Team Championship, Omega lost the IWGP Junior Heavyweight Championship back and Anderson and Gallows lost the IWGP Tag Team Championship. In Bullet Club's final title match of the event, Styles unsuccessfully challenged Shinsuke Nakamura for the IWGP Intercontinental Championship. Hours after the event it was reported that Anderson, Gallows and Styles had all given their notice to NJPW and would be leaving the promotion for WWE. The following day, the rest of Bullet Club turned on Styles and kicked him out of the group with Omega taking over the leadership. Omega also announced his graduation from the junior heavyweight division, stating that he did not want a rematch with Kushida, but instead a match with Nakamura for the IWGP Intercontinental Championship.

In the aftermath of Omega taking over Bullet Club's leadership, he and The Young Bucks formed their own subgroup within the stable, called The Elite. Omega and The Young Bucks came up with the idea for The Elite themselves, feeling the need to create something new after being forced by NJPW into Bullet Club and what Omega called a "Too Sweet", "Suck it" parody of the nWo. Omega stated that he and The Young Bucks were The Elite, but accepted if NJPW continued calling them Bullet Club "in parentheses" as the stable was their "cash cow". He explained the name change by stating that following Anderson, Gallows and Styles' departures from NJPW, "Bullet Club [was not] so much the Bullet Club anymore". Omega later added his opinion that Anderson, Gallows and Styles' departures had "watered down" Bullet Club's ranks, which is why he wanted to push The Elite to the forefront, claiming that when people said that "Bullet Club [had] been doing some really cool stuff", they always meant him and The Young Bucks and not the other members of the group.
During 2016, Gallows and Anderson also left NJPW after signing a contract with WWE. However, on March 12, Tonga revealed that his partner for the upcoming IWGP Tag Team Championship match and the newest member of Bullet Club was his real-life brother Tevita Fifita, who was two days later given the ring name "Tanga Loa", with the tag team between him and Tonga dubbed "Guerrillas of Destiny" (GOD). Also, ROH wrestlers Adam Cole and Adam Page joined the stable in May. Cole went on to form another Bullet Club sub-group with The Young Bucks, named "Superkliq". In NJPW, Page was given the ring name "Hangman Page", which he eventually also began using in ROH.
Before Summer, several members of the Bullet Club won titles, like the Young Bucks winning the IWGP Jr. Tag team Titles, Guerrilas of Destiny winning the IWGP Tag Team Titles and Omega winning the Intercontinental title. However, the biggest accomplishment was Omega winning the 2016 G1 Climax, becoming the third wrestler to win the tournament in his first attempt as well as the first non-Japanese wrestler in history to win the tournament. During the following month, Captain New Japan and Cody joined Bullet Club. Captain changed his character to "Bone Soldier". The name came from Bullet Club's original shirt, which featured a character named Bone Soldier. In addition, the term had previously also been used as a nickname for members of Bullet Club. Also, The Young Bucks won the ROH World Tag Team Championship for the second time and Guerrillas of Destiny regained the IWGP Tag Team Championship, but Adam Cole lost the ROH World Championship.
On January 4, 2017, at Wrestle Kingdom 11, The Young Bucks lost the IWGP Junior Heavyweight Tag Team Championship to Roppongi Vice. while the Guerrillas of Destiny lost the IWGP Tag Team Championship to Tomohiro Ishii and Toru Yano. In the main event of the show, Omega unsuccessfully challenged Kazuchika Okada for the IWGP Heavyweight Championship.
Afterwards, Omega took a hiatus from NJPW to "reassess [his] future". Upon his return on February 26, a new storyline involving tension between Omega and Cole was started, with The Young Bucks caught in the middle. On February 11, Frankie Kazarian joined Bullet Club, turning on longtime tag team partner Christopher Daniels at a taping of "Ring of Honor Wrestling". On March 4, The Young Bucks lost the ROH World Tag Team Championship to The Hardys (Matt and Jeff Hardy). On March 10 at ROH's 15th Anniversary Show, Kazarian turned on Adam Cole and Bullet Club, revealing his tenure was only a ruse to help Christopher Daniels become the new ROH World Champion. The following day, Cole, disappointed with The Young Bucks for not having his back, tried to fire them from Bullet Club, but the two responded by stating that he could not fire them as Omega, not Cole, was the leader of the stable. On May 12, Omega fired Cole from Bullet Club and gave his spot in the stable to ROH World Television Champion Marty Scurll. Two days later, on the final night of the tour, Scurll lost the ROH World Television Championship to Kushida, following a distraction from Cole.

In the months following Wrestle Kingdom 11, Omega looked for another shot at the IWGP Heavyweight Championship, but his plan of obtaining one through the 2017 New Japan Cup was derailed, when he was eliminated in his first round match by Tomohiro Ishii. After defeating Ishii in a rematch on May 3 at Wrestling Dontaku 2017, Omega was nominated by Kazuchika Okada for an IWGP Heavyweight Championship rematch at Dominion 6.11 in Osaka-jo Hall. On June 11 at Dominion 6.11 in Osaka-jo Hall, The Young Bucks defeated Roppongi Vice to win the IWGP Junior Heavyweight Tag Team Championship for the sixth time. In the main event of the show, Omega and Okada wrestled to a 60-minute time limit draw for the IWGP Heavyweight Championship. The match also started a storyline, where Omega and Cody began having problems with each other with Cody wanting to throw in the towel for Omega, insisting he was too badly injured. On June 23 at Best in the World, Cody defeated Christopher Daniels to bring the ROH World Championship back to Bullet Club. On July 1, during the first night of G1 Special in USA, Cody unsuccessfully challenged Okada for the IWGP Heavyweight Championship. During the match, Omega, playing off what had happened at Dominion, walked out, wanting to throw in the towel for Cody, which led to Cody confronting him after the show. The following day, Omega defeated Tomohiro Ishii in the finals of an eight-man tournament to become the inaugural IWGP United States Heavyweight Champion.
Later that month, three members of Bullet Club took part in the 2017 G1 Climax; Fale in block A and Omega and Tonga in block B. Omega won his block and advanced to the finals of the tournament with a record of seven wins and two losses by defeating IWGP Heavyweight Champion Okada in their third match against each other on August 12. During the head-to-head match between Omega and Tonga, which was won by the former, tensions escalated between the two with Tonga questioning Omega's leadership of Bullet Club due to his association with The Elite. On August 13, Omega was defeated in the finals of the 2017 G1 Climax by Tetsuya Naito. On September 6, it was announced that Tonga and Loa's youngest brother, NJPW young lion Leo Tonga, was joining Bullet Club, replacing Omega on an upcoming tour due to him having suffered a knee injury. On September 22 at Death Before Dishonor XV, The Young Bucks lost the ROH World Tag Team Championship to The Motor City Machine Guns. On November 5 at Power Struggle, Scurll defeated Will Ospreay to bring the IWGP Junior Heavyweight Championship back to Bullet Club. On November 17, actor Stephen Amell, who had befriended Cody when they worked together in WWE, joined Bullet Club, wrestling his first match as a member at ROH's show later that same day. The following month, Guerrillas of Destiny made it to their second consecutive World Tag League final by winning their block in the 2017 tournament with a record of five wins and two losses. On December 11, they were defeated in the finals of the tournament by "Los Ingobernables de Japon" (Evil and Sanada). Four days later at ROH's Final Battle, Cody lost the ROH World Championship to Dalton Castle. On December 17, Fale and Guerrillas of Destiny defeated Bushi, Evil and Sanada to become the new NEVER Openweight 6-Man Tag Team Champions.

On January 4, 2018, at Wrestle Kingdom 12, the Young Bucks defeated Roppongi 3K (Sho and Yoh) to regain the IWGP Junior Heavyweight Tag Team Championship. Also at the event, Fale and the Guerrillas of Destiny lost the NEVER Openweight 6-Man Tag Team Championship and Marty Scurll lost the IWGP Junior Heavyweight Championship back to Will Ospreay. The following night at New Year Dash!! 2018, Fale and the G.O.D. defeated Beretta, Ishii and Yano to win back the NEVER Openweight 6-Man Tag Team Championship, beginning 2018 with six members of Bullet Club holding championships in NJPW (the others being Omega and the Young Bucks with the IWGP United States Championship and the IWGP Jr. Tag Team Championships respectively). At the same event, Bullet Club, with Cody leading, attempted to attack Kota Ibushi with a chair following a 10-man tag match, but were stopped by Omega, teasing tension between the two men over the leadership of Bullet Club. On night two of The New Beginning in Sapporo, following Omega's loss of the IWGP United States Championship to Jay White, he was attacked by Cody and hit with the Cross Rhodes, continuing the infighting within the faction.

The rivalry between Cody and Omega continued throughout February and March at both Ring Of Honor and NJPW events, beginning a series of matches pitting members of Bullet Club against each other in both tag and singles matches. During this time, Tongan members Tonga, Loa and Fale keep distance with the two factions, being known as Bullet Club OGs. Around this time, the tension within Bullet Club would be documented as the focus of the YouTube series "Being The Elite". G.O.D. also began their own YouTube series following the members of Bullet Club who are stationed mainly in NJPW.
On April 7, Omega and Cody fought in a singles match at Supercard of Honor XII with the leadership of Bullet Club at stake. During the match, the Young Bucks attempted to help Omega by superkicking Cody. However, this backfired when Cody moved out of the way, with the Bucks kicking Omega instead. Thanks to this, Cody was able to use the Cross Rhodes on Omega to win the match. Following the reunion of the Golden☆Lovers and despite not joining Bullet Club as a member, Ibushi would become a regular in Bullet Club tag matches. 

On May 3, the first night of Wrestling Dontaku 2018, the trio of the Young Bucks and Scurll defeated Fale and the G.O.D. to capture the NEVER Six-Man Tag Team Championship. During the second night of Wrestling Dontaku, Tama Tonga introduced the new "Bone Soldier", who attacked Ospreay and revealed himself to be Taiji Ishimori. Ishimori would go on to win Block A of the Best of the Super Juniors 2018 tournament, but ended up losing to Hiromu Takahashi in the finals.

On June 9 at Dominion in Osaka-jo Hall, the Young Bucks defeated Evil and Sanada to win the IWGP Heavyweight Tag Team Championships for the first time, and Omega would defeat Kazuchika Okada 2 falls to 1 to win the IWGP Heavyweight Championship for the first time, ending Okada's reign as the longest champion in history at 720 days. After the match, Omega made peace with the Young Bucks in the ring, and would announce during the post match comments that Ibushi, the Young Bucks, and himself had the formed a new sub-group called The Golden Elite. The following day at a press conference aired on NJPW World, Omega confirmed that he and the Young Bucks were still a part of the Bullet Club, as well as clarifying that while Ibushi had joined The Elite, he was not a member of Bullet Club. Omega also claimed he was still the leader of Bullet Club, and announced that his first defense of the IWGP Heavyweight Championship would be against Cody at the G1 Special at the Cow Palace in San Francisco.

On July 7, at the G1 Special, Omega defeated Cody to retain the IWGP Heavyweight Title. After Omega's usual post-match address to the fans, he and The Young Bucks were joined by Tonga, Loa and King Haku. The Tongans appeared to be congratulating Omega, only to attack them soon after, revealing new "B.C. Firing Squad" T-shirts, as they did so. Page and Scurll both came to The Elite's defense by attacking the Tongans, before Yujiro Takahashi and Owens attempted to bring the conflict to a halt; the Tongans ultimately dismantled all four. Cody then came out and was offered a chance to attack Omega with a steel chair, only to go after the Tongans and be attacked as well. As the Tongans left, declaring themselves to be the true Bullet Club, Omega and Cody embraced, finally realigning and in effect restoring Omega's leadership of the group on their side. Fale and Hikuleo were shown to have aligned with the Bullet Club OG contingent in a video entitled "Don't Call it a Comeback" on G.O.D.'s official YouTube channel. During a livestream on Instagram on August 10, 2018, Tama Tonga confirmed that Ishimori is aligned with Bullet Club OG. On the final of the G1 Climax 28, the trio of Tama Tonga, Tanga Loa and Taiji Ishimori beat the trio of the Young Bucks and Marty Scurll for the NEVER Openweight Six-Man Championship.

On October 8, 2018, at King of Pro-Wrestling, former Chaos members Jay White, Jado and Gedo joined Bullet Club. Australian wrestler Robbie Eagles was also announced as a new member as Ishimori's tag team partner in the Super Jr. Tag League.

On October 24, 2018, Cody announced that he was no longer a member of the Bullet Club via his official Twitter account. On the "Talk is Jericho" podcast with Chris Jericho on October 30, Matt Jackson confirmed that he, Cody Rhodes, Kenny Omega, Marty Scurll, Nick Jackson, and Adam Page are now called simply The Elite and that they are no longer part of the Bullet Club.

At the end of 2018, Taiji Ishimori and Robbie Eagles ended the Super Jr. Tag League in a tie for 4th place with 3 wins and 4 losses for a total score of 6, while Tama Tonga and Tanga Loa lost in the finals of the World Tag League 2018 against "Los Ingobernables de Japón" (Evil and Sanada). After the tournament, Chase Owens and Yujiro Takahashi left the stable and aligned with The Elite, but they rejoined Bullet Club at New Year Dash!! On December 22, Tama Tonga announced that White was the new leader of the Bullet Club. At Wrestle Kingdom 13, White defeated Okada in a singles match. Also, during the event Ishimori defeated Kushida to win the IWGP Jr. Heavyweight Title. At The New Beginning in Osaka, White defeated Hiroshi Tanahashi with a Bladerunner to win the IWGP Heavyweight Title. On February 23, Guerillas of Destiny would capture their fifth tag team heavyweight championship against EVIL and Sanada of Los Ingobernables de Japón at Honor Rising. On March 8, it was announced that El Phantasmo would be joining Bullet Club.

In January 2016, NJPW announced a DVD chronicling the history of Bullet Club and featuring interviews with members of the stable, which was released on March 30, 2016. In January 2017, it was announced that the "Tekken 7: Fated Retribution" video game would feature a Bullet Club shirt as an alternate outfit for all characters.





