Real and True

"Real and True" is a song written and performed by American rapper Future, American singer Miley Cyrus, and English singer Mr Hudson. It was released as a single on November 5, 2013, by A1 Records, Freebandz, and Epic Records. Produced by the artists' frequent collaborator Mike Will Made It, the song is a pop and R&B track, the lyrics of which describe an everlasting love.

"Real and True" received generally favorable reviews from music critics, who complimented its overall production and lyrical content, but felt that the vocals were over-processed. Its accompanying music video premiered on November 10, 2013, preceding the rebroadcast of the 2013 MTV Europe Music Awards in the United States.

Future and Cyrus had first collaborated on the track "My Darlin'" for Cyrus' fourth studio album "Bangerz" (2013). The lyrics of "My Darlin'" concern the angst following a failed relationship and the simultaneous desire to reconcile. Later, Cyrus expressed interest in "Real and True", recording her vocals for the chorus. Mr Hudson also recorded vocals for the chorus, which were incorporated with Cyrus' singing. Future wrote the remaining verses to complement the contributions of Cyrus and Mr Hudson, though the two received credits for being co-writers. The track was released on November 5, 2013. Future raps the first verse, which is in third-person perspective, Cyrus raps the second verse and Future raps the third verse. Mr Hudson sings the chorus (except the second time, where it is sung by Cyrus) and Cyrus and Future join Mr Hudson on the chorus the fourth and fifth time. The song had originally leaked with an extra verse from Future, but it was cut from the final version.

"Real and True" is a pop and R&B song, the lyrics of which describe an everlasting love. During the chorus, Cyrus and Mr. Hudson sing the lyrics "When the sun dies and the stars fade from view / Our love will remain real and true / Through the distance and cold depths of space / The radio sings our song / It's a love real and true". Carolyn Menyes from MusicTimes noted that the artists' vocals heavily relied on Auto-Tune technology, which she credited with providing a "cohesive sound throughout the track". Future suggested that "Real and True" was lyrically inspired by his fiancée, American recording artist Ciara, commenting "it might surprise people what I'm saying 'cause I'm speaking on my relationship and everything I'm going through right now and trying to capture that moment." "Real and True" was produced by Mike Will Made It, who frequently collaborates with Cyrus and Future.

The song is performed in the key of B major with a tempo of 70 beats per minute in common time.

"Real and True" received generally favorable reviews from music critics, who complimented its overall production and lyrical content, but felt that the vocals were over-processed. Erika Ramirez from "Billboard" felt that "Cyrus steals the spotlight with her vocal prowess" during her verse of the track, while Alex Young of Consequence of Sound commended the recording as a "feel good love song highlighted by an impressive hook", adding that Future delivered a "delicate mix of rap and sensual croons". Writing for "Exclaim!", Josiah Hughes enjoyed the "general feeling of love and goodness" present throughout the song. Carl Williott from Idolator complimented Mike Will Made It's production contributions, and called the track "pretty". Carolyn Menyes of MusicTimes commented that the track "gets its point across and is tender" despite "under-utilizing" Cyrus' vocals.

An accompanying music video for "Real and True" premiered on November 10, 2013, preceding the rebroadcast of the 2013 MTV Europe Music Awards in the United States. The clip begins as astronauts Future and Mr Hudson discover the corpse of another astronaut, portrayed by Cyrus. After being revived on an operating table, Cyrus (covered in silver glitter) and Future are shown intimately singing their respective verses to one another. Interspersed throughout the video are scenes of Mr Hudson singing the chorus. As the clip finishes, Future and Mr Hudson are shown leaving the planet where they found Cyrus on their damaged rocket.

Referencing earlier pictures from the music video prior to its official release, Edwin Ortiz stated that its theme was a "space age love story", further opining that it shared a space-themed concept with Future's debut studio album "Pluto" (2012). Zoe Shenton from the "Daily Mirror" provided a favorable review for the music video, commenting "clothes or no clothes, [Cyrus] looks and sounds incredible". A writer for "The Huffington Post" thought that the "appropriately futuristic visuals" complemented the space-themed lyrics in the song.

"Real and True" debuted on the South Korea Gaon Single Chart at number 189 during the week of November 3 to 9, 2013. In the United States, the song peaked at number 3 on the US Bubbling Under Hot 100 singles chart.


