The Powerpuff Girls

The Powerpuff Girls is an American superhero animated television series created by animator Craig McCracken and produced by Hanna-Barbera (later Cartoon Network Studios) for Cartoon Network. The show follows Blossom, Bubbles and Buttercup, three colorful kindergarten-age girls with superpowers, as well as their father and creator, a scientist named Professor Utonium. The girls all live in the fictional city of Townsville, USA, and are frequently called upon by the Mayor of Townsville to use their powers to help fight local criminals, including Mojo Jojo, Fuzzy Lumpkins, Him, and Princess Morebucks.

McCracken originally developed the show in 1992 as a cartoon short series entitled "Whoopass Stew!" while in his second year at CalArts. Following a name change, Cartoon Network featured the first "The Powerpuff Girls" pilots in its animation showcase program "What a Cartoon!" in 1995 and 1996. The series made its official debut as a Cartoon Cartoon on November 18, 1998, with the final episode airing on March 25, 2005. Excluding the two pilot episode shorts, the series ran for a total of six seasons, totaling 78 episodes. Along with the episodes, a Christmas special, and a feature film were also made concurrently. Two additional specials were made after the show ceased to air in 2005, which included the tenth anniversary special (intended by McCracken to be the series finale) in 2008 and a CGI special in 2014 (which was made with McCracken's approval but without his input).

Various spin-off media for the show include: an anime, three CD soundtracks, a home video collection, comic books, a series of video games, as well as various licensed merchandise. "The Powerpuff Girls" was nominated for six Emmy Awards, nine Annie Awards, and a Kids' Choice Award during its run. In all, the series won four awards and generally received positive critical reception.

The show revolves around the adventures of three kindergarten aged girls with an array of various superpowers: Blossom (bright pink), Bubbles (light blue), and Buttercup (bright green). The plot of an episode is usually some humorous variation of standard superhero and tokusatsu shows, with the girls using their powers to defend their town from villains and giant monsters. In addition, the girls have to deal with the normal issues that young children face, such as sibling rivalries, loose teeth, personal hygiene, going to school, bed wetting, or dependence on a security blanket. Episodes often contain hidden references to older pop culture (especially noticeable in the episode "Meet the Beat Alls", which is a homage to the Beatles). The cartoon always tries to keep different ideas within each episode with some small tributes and parodies thrown in.

The show is set mainly in the city of Townsville, USA. Townsville is depicted as a major American city, with a cityscape consisting of several major skyscrapers. In his review of "The Powerpuff Girls Movie", movie critic Bob Longino of "The Atlanta Journal-Constitution" said, "the intricate drawings emanate 1950s futuristic pizzazz like a David Hockney scenescape," and that the show is "one of the few American creations that is both gleeful pop culture and exquisite high art."

As depicted in the opening sequence of each episode, the Powerpuff Girls Blossom, Bubbles and Buttercup were created by Professor Utonium in an attempt to create the "perfect little girl" using a mixture of "sugar, spice, and everything nice". However, he accidentally spilled a mysterious substance called "Chemical X" into the mixture, creating three girls and granting all three superpowers including wingless flight, super strength, superhuman speed, near invulnerability, x-ray vision, superhuman senses, red heat vision, pink-green-and-blue energy projection, invisibility, and control over lightning and fire. In the original pilot, the accidental substance was a can of "Whoopass", which was replaced by "Chemical X" in the aired version.

The three girls all have oval-shaped heads, abnormally large eyes inspired by Margaret Keane's art, flat feet with toes and stubby arms and legs, and lack noses, ears, fingers and necks. McCracken preferred them to look more animated rather than going for a "realistic" look, meaning fewer body parts were needed. Blossom, Bubbles, and Buttercup normally wear dresses that match the colors of their eyes with black stripes, as well as white tights and black Mary Janes. The closing theme to the cartoon offers a nutshell description of the three Powerpuff Girls' personalities: "Blossom, commander and the leader. Bubbles, she is the joy and the laughter. Buttercup, she is the toughest fighter."

During Craig McCracken's first year in the character animation program of CalArts, he created a series of short cartoons based on a character called "No Neck Joe". In June 1991, he created a drawing of three girls on a small sheet of orange construction paper as a birthday card design for his brother. The following year he included the three girls as the main characters of his short film "Whoopass Stew! The Whoopass Girls in: A Sticky Situation". Initially, McCracken wanted to animate four "Whoopass Girls" shorts, but only one came to be. McCracken's shorts were selected to be shown at Spike and Mike's Sick and Twisted Festival of Animation in 1994.
While working on "2 Stupid Dogs" in 1992, McCracken's "Whoopass Girls" short was picked up for a series by Cartoon Network. However, the name "Whoopass" had to be dropped for the channel to include it as part of its new "What a Cartoon!" animated shorts showcase. McCracken explained it was because many executives at Cartoon Network didn't think that anyone would make toys for kids with the word "ass" in it. So the title was changed and became "The Powerpuff Girls" and the name Whoopass was also changed to Powerpuff by Craig McCracken, and the "can of whoop ass" was renamed "Chemical X". McCracken's new short, entitled "The Powerpuff Girls in: Meat Fuzzy Lumpkins", aired as part the network's "World Premiere Toon-In" on February 20, 1995. The short was not as popular as "Dexter's Laboratory", a project McCracken and former classmate Genndy Tartakovsky (who also directed many episodes of "Powerpuff Girls") worked on together; being the most popular of the shorts, "Dexter's Laboratory" was the first to be greenlit by the network. Cartoon Network executive Mike Lazzo (who later serve as the executive producer for Williams Street in the fifth season of "Samurai Jack") allowed McCracken to produce a new "Powerpuff Girls" short titled "Crime 101", which aired on "What a Cartoon!" in early 1996. Announcer Ernie Anderson, the narrator of the pilot episodes, died of cancer in 1997, and he was replaced by Tom Kenny for the remainder of the series.

The "Powerpuff Girls" series debut on November 18, 1998, was the highest rated premiere in Cartoon Network's history at the time. During its run, the series consistently scored the highest rating for an original series each week for the network across a wide range of demographics—from young children to adults. In October 2000, Cartoon Network credited the series for its Friday night prime time ratings win among cable networks. By the end of 2000, merchandising based on the series encompassed a whole variety of products, including T-shirts, toys, video games, lunchboxes, and dishware. Concerning the show's success, Craig McCracken has stated, "I thought it would get on Cartoon Network and college kids would watch it and there would be a few random T-shirts out there in the rave scene or in record shops. But I had no idea that it would take off to this extent." Following the series' fourth season, the closing of Hanna-Barbera Productions and the death of its executive William Hanna in 2001, McCracken left it to focus on his new animated series, "Foster's Home for Imaginary Friends", leaving Chris Savino to take his place and the production of "The Powerpuff Girls" was moved to Cartoon Network Studios. The show's last original run episode was on March 25, 2005; in all, six seasons were made. Cartoon Network had offered to give McCracken and Savino a seventh season of the series, but they believed the series had run its course.

All of the original episodes were hand-drawn and produced at Rough Draft Studios in South Korea, except the "What a Cartoon!" shorts, with the first one being animated at Animal House in Japan and the second being animated at Fil Cartoons in the Philippines. James L. Venable, Thomas Chase, & Stephen Rucker composed the opening theme of the series, and Scottish band Bis performed the ending theme song, as played during the credits. The opening theme uses a sped-up drum break sample of "Funky Drummer" performed by Clyde Stubblefield.

In August 2008, McCracken revealed on his DeviantArt account, as had been announced in that year's Comic Con, that he was working with Cartoon Network on a new half-hour "Powerpuff Girls" special to celebrate the series' tenth anniversary. The special, titled "The Powerpuff Girls Rule!!!", aired on the Pan-Euro Cartoon Network on November 29, 2008, on the Powerpuff Girls Birthday Marathon, and in the United States on January 19, 2009, as part of its 10th anniversary marathon. Unlike previous episodes in the series, the anniversary special was animated using Adobe Flash at Cartoon Network Studios. In March 2012, the series returned to Cartoon Network in reruns on the revived block, Cartoon Planet.

On January 28, 2013, a new CGI special titled "Powerpuff Girls: Dance Pantsed" was announced to premiere that year, though it was later delayed to January 20, 2014. The former Beatle Ringo Starr promoted the special on Cartoon Network singing a new original song "I Wish I Was a Powerpuff Girl" with previews leading up to the airdate. Ringo also voiced a new character named Fibonacci Sequins in the episode. The special was directed by Dave Smith, who directed episodes for the series in the past, and featured the original cast members reprising their roles. This "Powerpuff Girls "special marked the first time that series creator Craig McCracken had no input. The episode's plot has Mojo Jojo kidnap Fibonacci along with an opera singer and a badger. The girls rescue all of them, and the Powerpuff Girls defeat Mojo yet again with his kidnapping plan. Not deterred he then goes on to invent an evil video game called "Dance Pants R-EVILution" to take over Townsville. Common Sense Media gave the special 3/5 stars citing the "tasteful update of the original animation style" however recommends it for older kids around the age of 7. GON (Geeked Out Nation) gave the show a B rank and described it as "...a good special with the return of the characters that many of us grew up [with]", while they said that the special has few flaws. Den of Geek gave the special a 2.5 out 5 said "The Powerpuff reboot needs those paddles to jump-start it. I want more. But I want better."

In April 2005, plans for a Japanese anime version, "Demashita! Powerpuff Girls Z", were announced. The series premiered in Japan the following year with 52 half-hour episodes, airing each Saturday from July 1 to December 23, 2006, and from January 6 to June 30, 2007. The series deviated from its American predecessor in terms of style, storyline, and characterization, but only minimally retained the essential themes that made the original a success. The characters feature three junior high school students Momoko Akatsutsumi (Hyper Blossom), Miyako Gotokuji (Rolling Bubbles), and Kaoru Matsubara (Powered Buttercup) as the three heroes. A manga adaptation, illustrated by Shiho Komiyuno, was serialized in Shueisha's "Ribon" magazine between June 2006 and July 2007.

"The Powerpuff Girls Movie" was released in the United States on July 3, 2002, by Warner Bros. and Cartoon Network. The movie, a prequel to the series, tells the story of how the Powerpuff Girls were created, and how Mojo Jojo (voiced by: Roger L. Jackson) became a supervillain. After Blossom, Bubbles and Buttercup were created by Professor Utonium to help the city against crime, they end up only causing chaos in Townsville. Down about how everyone refers to them as freaks, they turn to Mojo Jojo, a monkey who says he is there to help make people like them again. Unknown to the girls, Mojo Jojo was Professor Utonium's lab chimp helper who was mutated as a cause from the Powerpuff Girls being made and has become super smart as a result and jealous of them. Mojo Jojo ends up tricking the girls into helping him make a machine to mutate other chimps. Seeing what they have done the kids run away in shame but come back after seeing Professor Utonium in trouble, Blossom, Bubbles and Buttercup end up beating Mojo Jojo and his army of mutated smart chimps and saving the day, thus becoming Townsville's new defenders. The movie received a rating of 63% at Rotten Tomatoes, and received some criticism for the violence involved. In all, the movie grossed $16 million worldwide with an $11 million budget.

Three CD soundtracks were officially released for the series. The first, entitled "Heroes & Villains", features original songs about the "Powerpuff Girls" characters by a number of artists, including the new wave group Devo, Bis, The Apples in Stereo and Frank Black. The first album did well, topping the "Billboard"s children's music chart for six weeks. Another album entitled, "The City of Soundsville", features electronica-style character themes and also did well with critics. The third album, entitled "Power Pop", features a more teen-oriented variety of pop songs. This third and final album was considered a "big disappointment" and not received as well. The British girl group Sugababes also released a song called "Angels with Dirty Faces" to promote "The Powerpuff Girls Movie." The song received generally positive reviews from critics, and peaked at number seven on the UK Singles Chart. The music video channels "Nano of the North", an episode from the fourth season of "The Powerpuff Girls", in which each Sugababes member portrays a Powerpuff Girl.

A crossover parody of "The Powerpuff Girls" and "2 Broke Girls" was done in Cartoon Network's TV series "MAD"'s second season known as "2 Broke Powerpuff Girls". The parody which aired on January 30, 2012, is of Bubbles and Buttercup, who are broke and work for "Him" in a diner after the show got placed on permanent hiatus. Tara Strong (Bubbles) and Tom Kane ("Him") reprised their roles here. The "MAD" episode with the parody ranked #26/30 for the week with 1.903 million viewers. In February 2013, IDW Publishing announced a partnership with Cartoon Network to produce comics based on its properties and this series was one of the titles announced to be published.

A fan-produced webcomic series called PowerPuff Girls Doujinshi was created in 2004 and released through Snafu Comics. The girls are shown to be a bit older, but with the same personalities as, their T.V. counterparts, and the comic includes many characters from other cartoon shows. The story has the kids now going to school in a neighboring city of Townsville known as Megaville. The comic was the "Outstanding Superhero Comic" and "Outstanding Character Art" winner on the Web Cartoonist's Choice Awards in 2005.

In 2010, an anime produced by Gainax, Panty and Stocking with Garterbelt, used an art style very similar to that of the Powerpuff Girls. 

Shortly after the 2014 CGI special's release, a comic which was published by IDW Publishing was withdrawn after retailers complained that they wanted to boycott the issue. The comic, which shows the Powerpuff Girls with breasts and dressed in latex, was designed by an artist who works for Cartoon Network. The artist was "thinking of it more along the lines of 'female empowerment' than the kind of thing you guys are talking about". Cartoon Network said in a statement: "We recognise some fans' reaction to the cover and, as such, will no longer be releasing it at comic book shops."

From August 21 to October 1, 2000, Subway promoted the series with four toys in their kids' meals. A set of six kids' meal toys was available as part of an April 2001 Dairy Queen promotion, which also included a sweepstakes offering the "Powerpuff Girls" VHS "Boogie Frights". Jack in the Box released six "Powerpuff Girls" toys in July 2002 as a tie-in for "The Powerpuff Girls Movie". On February 10, 2003, Burger King began a four-week promotion featuring "The Powerpuff Girls" and "Dragon Ball Z" toys as well as special codes to redeem online for Cartoon Network's Cartoon Orbit.

Several video games were made for this show all being action in genre. "The Powerpuff Girls: Bad Mojo Jojo", released on November 14, 2000, follows Blossom as she tries to beat Mojo Jojo. The game was called "simple and boring" by GameSpot and was a failure critically. "The Powerpuff Girls: Paint the Townsville Green", another game released in November 2000, follows Buttercup as she fights crime. "The Powerpuff Girls: Battle HIM" follows Bubbles in her fight against HIM and was released in February 2001. "The Powerpuff Girls: Chemical X-traction" was released in October 2001, where the girls battle enemies in a variety of settings in order to reclaim Chemical X and track down Mojo Jojo, who fed the material to all the villains in Townsville. IGN gave the game a positive review while giving the PSone version a 2.0/10 bad review. "The Powerpuff Girls: Relish Rampage" was released in November 2002. All three girls are playable in a 3D world, and the game received mixed reviews. "The Powerpuff Girls: Mojo Jojo A-Go-Go" released in 2001 centers around the name of the Powerpuff Girls' mission to stop Mojo Jojo and his minions. The game received mixed reviews. "The Powerpuff Girls: HIM and Seek" was released in 2002 where the girls battle their variety of enemies through Townsville while on a scavenger hunt. The game received mostly positive reviews.
PC games were also made for the series. These include: "The Powerpuff Girls: Mojo Jojo Clone Zone", "The Powerpuff Girls: Princess Snorebucks", "The Powerpuff Girls: Mojo Jojo's Pet Project", and "The Powerpuff Girls: Gamesville".

In a 2000 "Entertainment Weekly" review, Marc Bernadin complimented the show on its "spot-on pop-culture acumen" and "unparalleled sense of fun", giving it a warm welcome from earlier "lame" superhero cartoons that he grew up with. Peter Marks of "The New York Times" noted the show's use of adult humor and pop culture references, declaring it "the sort of playful satire that can appeal as much to a viewer of 37 as 7." Joly Herman of Common Sense Media describes the show as a "cute, highly stylized series thrills the senses with its strange characters, funny situations, and lots of lowbrow humor". She goes on to say, however, that the show does go from innocent to violent in no time and that there is not much protecting young viewers against the violent undertones. Robert Lloyd of the "LA Times" said that the series might be "transgressive" based on little violence but "also cute." The TV Guide chose the Powerpuff Girls as No. 13 in a list of the 50 Greatest cartoon characters of all time.

IGN ranked the series 18th in its Top 25 Primetime Animated Series of All Time list in 2006. Delta Express promoted the series by having a Boeing 737-200 jet painted with a special livery featuring the characters Blossom, Bubbles, and Buttercup on its exterior. The plane's inaugural flight was held at Logan International Airport in Boston, Massachusetts, on July 17, 2000. In 2002 the aircraft was repainted with a different "Powerpuff Girls" theme to promote "The Powerpuff Girls Movie". The "Powerpuff Girls" series has won two Primetime Emmys, two Annie Awards, and including those four wins, has been nominated a total of sixteen times for various awards.




