Iron Rattler

Iron Rattler is a steel roller coaster located at Six Flags Fiesta Texas in San Antonio, Texas. The ride opened in 2013, replacing The Rattler, a wooden roller coaster, by putting a new steel track on top of The Rattler's wooden support structure. The distance between the lowest and highest points of the first drop was increased from and the drop was made steeper by changing the angle to 81 degrees. The resulting modifications increased the speed of the trains from . It is the first hybrid wood and steel roller coaster to feature an inversion, in which riders are turned upside-down and then back upright. The inversion is a zero-g-roll, which is when the train goes through a combination of a loop and a roll.

The Iron Rattler was designed by Alan Schilke and built by Rocky Mountain Construction. The wooden Rattler had been constructed by Roller Coaster Corporation of America. When it opened in 1992, it was the tallest and fastest wooden coaster in the world, with a height of , a first drop of and a top speed of .

Six Flags Fiesta Texas announced in August 2012, that they would be revamping their wooden coaster, "The Rattler", into a steel track coaster, to be called "Iron Rattler". The renovation would be performed by Rocky Mountain Construction and would feature the I-Box steel track on some of the original wooden coaster supports, Rattler-themed trains supplied by Gerstlauer, and a barrel roll. The new ride would open for the 2013 season.

"The Rattler" had been constructed by Roller Coaster Corporation of America. When the coaster debuted on March 14, 1992, it was the tallest and fastest wooden coaster in the world, with a height of , a first drop of and a top speed of , outdoing its then rival, "Mean Streak" at Ohio's Cedar Point. Designer John Pierce stated that the original plans kept changing as park co-developers Gaylord Entertainment Company insisted on having the tallest wooden coaster in the world. It held this title until 1994, when its first drop was shortened from , resulting in a reduction of its top speed from .

In late 2009, Six Flags Over Texas closed their "Texas Giant" wooden roller coaster for a $10 million renovation which took more than a year to complete. Idaho-firm Rocky Mountain Construction replaced the wooden track with a new steel I-Box track, retaining a wooden support structure. The refurbishment was ultimately a success with "resoundingly positive reviews from riders". The park's parent company, Six Flags, immediately began looking for other rides in its chain which would benefit from a similar overhaul.

At the IAAPA 2011 Trade Show, Alan Schilke of Rocky Mountain Construction revealed their company had two projects that they would be working on for 2013 openings – one of which was an I-Box conversion of a wooden roller coaster. It was later revealed by the "Spokane Journal of Business" that "The Rattler" would be completely refurbished in 2013 with new track and trains in a manner similar to that used by the company on the "New Texas Giant" at Six Flags Over Texas in 2011. Although Six Flags had not publicly confirmed their plans, the park announced that "The Rattler" would close on August 5, 2012. At the end of the operating day on August 5, 2012, park personnel and select enthusiasts took the final ride, after which, "The Rattler", as a wood coaster, ceased operation.

The National Roller Coaster Museum and Archives announced on April 16, 2013, they would be auctioning off the first ride of Iron Rattler on the evening of May 17, 2013, and proceeds going towards the museum. Also a soft-opening was held to the media on May 15, 2013. The grand opening of the Iron Rattler was May 25, 2013.

After the deadly incident on the "New Texas Giant" on July 19, 2013, and because the two rides share several similarities, Six Flags Fiesta Texas had ceased running "Iron Rattler" pending investigation findings from its sister park. In under a month, Iron Rattler reopened on August 14 with seat belts as another added restraint to the two trains.

"Iron Rattler" is located in the Western-themed Crackaxle Canyon area of Fiesta Texas, sitting next to the "Road Runner Express" and "The Gully Washer". It is Rocky Mountain Construction's second installation of I-Box track, and the first to feature a barrel roll inversion. "Iron Rattler" operates with two Rattler-themed trains manufactured by Gerstlauer. Each train is made up of six cars which seat riders in two rows of two. Riders are restrained through the use of a lap bar and a seat belt.

The table below compares the original "Rattler", with the updated "Iron Rattler" ride. The original ride by the Roller Coaster Corporation of America was approximately longer due to a 900° helix atop the quarry walls. The refurbished ride by Rocky Mountain Construction features a steeper and longer first drop, thus achieving a faster speed.

The ride begins by exiting out of the station and turning around under Road Runner Express. It ascends a chain lift hill, before dropping at an angle of 81°. The track then ascends to the top of the quarry wall where it enters a 110° over-banked turn. A 95° over-banked turn leads to the left, back off the quarry wall. The ride then rises into the zero-g roll which sits atop the quarry wall. A camelback hill is followed by two more over-banked turns measuring 98° and 93°, respectively. The ride then drops back off the quarry wall and enters a tunnel near its base. The tunnel features fog and lighting effects. After exiting the tunnel, the train enters brake run and returns to the station.

"Iron Rattler" has generally been well received. Keith Miller of "Funworld Magazine" described the ride as "wonderfully smooth" highlighting the slow cresting of the lift hill as an "enjoyable element". He concludes by stating "there's not one restful moment on this ride". Arthur Levine of About.com gave the ride 4.5 out of 5 stars. Levine applauded Six Flags for replacing a bad wooden roller coaster with "a wonderful, remarkably smooth, thoroughly fun and enjoyable ride". He also gives kudos to Rocky Mountain Construction who manufactured the I-Box track and redesigned the ride. Brenda Solis of KLQB described the ride as "the most intense, craziest roller coaster ever". She also compared the renovated ride to the original ride, stating "the old Rattler wasn't as scary or intense or fast as the new one".

Before Iron Rattler's debut year, "Rattler" was only ranked once in the "Amusement Today"'s Golden Ticket Awards for the 2011 Top 50 Wooden Coasters ranked at 47 in the world, since the creation of the award in 1998. After the renovation in 2013, "Iron Rattler" was ranked highly by the voters. The ride was ranked the second-best new ride of 2013 with 19% of the vote. It also ranked at position 11 for the world's best steel roller coasters its debut year.


