Yo Nací Para Amarte

"Yo Nací Para Amarte" () is a song written by Kike Santander and performed by Mexican recording artist Alejandro Fernández. It was co-produced by Santander and Emilio Estefan and was released as the fourth and final single by Sony Music Mexico from "Me Estoy Enamorando" in 1998. The song is a bolero-pop ballad with ranchera influences and portrays the singer confessing his love which he admits "goes beyond reason".

It reached the top of the "Billboard" Hot Latin Songs chart in the United States and spent five weeks at this position. The recording led to Fernández receiving a nomination for Hot Latin Track of the Year and Pop Hot Latin Track of the Year at the 1999 "Billboard" Latin Music Awards while Santander received a BMI Latin Award for the track in the same year.

Since 1992, Alejandro Fernández established his music career as a ranchera singer like his father, iconic ranchera singer, Vicente Fernández. His previous albums, "Alejandro Fernández" (1992), "Piel De Niña" (1993), "Grandes Éxitos a la Manera de Alejandro Fernández" (1994), "Que Seas Muy Feliz" (1995), and "Muy Dentro de Mi Corazón" (1996), helped solidify Fernández as a ranchera singer. Although his last album, "Muy Dentro de Mi Corazón", was a success, Fernández did not want to simply record another ranchera album. "If I had released another album of just rancheras, people would have just expected the same thing, and then they would have begun to judge me by that one [musical] theme", Fernández explained. He also noted bolero's popularity on radio stations and cited his waning radio airplay. After listening to "Mi Tierra" by Gloria Estefan, Fernández sought Estefan's husband Emilio Estefan to have him produced Fernández's next album. After hearing Fernández's proposal, Emilio Estefan agreed on the idea to produce the album. Recording took place at Estefan's Crescent Moon Studios in Miami, Florida.
"Yo Nací Para Amarte", along with the other tracks in the album, is a bolero-pop ballad song with ranchera influences. The song was written by Colombian songwriter Kike Santander and co-produced by Santander and Estefan. The sound features the usage of strings, maracas, trumpets and percussion. In the lyrics, the protagonist declares his love and admits it "goes beyond reason".

"Yo Nací Para Amarte" was released as the fourth and final single from "Me Estoy Enamorando". In the United States, the single debuted at number 39 on the "Billboard" Hot Latin Songs chart on the week of 6 June 1998. It reached the top of the chart six weeks later succeeding "Rezo" by Carlos Ponce. The song spent five consecutive weeks in this position until it was replaced by "Una Fan Enamorada" by Servando & Florentino. The song ended 1998 as the seventh best-performing Latin song of the year in the US. The track also reached number two on the Latin Pop Songs chart. In November 1999, "Yo Nací Para Amarte" was labeled as one of the "hottest tracks" for Sony Discos in a list including the most successful songs released by the label since the launch of the "Billboard" Hot Latin Tracks chart in 1986.

Eliseo Cardona of "El Nuevo Herald" highlighted "Yo Nací Para Amarte" as one of the boleros where Fernández performs with "intensity and passion". At the 1999 "Billboard" Latin Music Awards, "Yo Nací Para Amarte" was nominated for Hot Latin Track of the Year and Pop Hot Latin Track of the Year. Fernández lost the first award to "Por Mujeres Como Tu" by Pepe Aguilar and the second to "Vuelve" by Ricky Martin. The track also led to Santander receiving a BMI Latin Award in 1999 in recognition of the best-performing Latin songs in 1998.

Credits adapted from the "Me Estoy Enamorando" liner notes.



