The World Needs a Hero

The World Needs a Hero is the ninth studio album by American thrash metal band Megadeth, released in May 2001 by Sanctuary Records. After the critical and commercial failure of the previous album "Risk" (1999), "The World Needs a Hero" represented a change back to a heavier musical direction. Subsequently, the album charted at number 16 on the "Billboard" 200 upon release.

After parting with former label Capitol Records, the album was the first of two Megadeth studio albums to be released by Sanctuary. It was the last of two studio albums to feature drummer Jimmy DeGrasso and the only one to feature Al Pitrelli on lead guitar. Furthermore, "The World Needs a Hero" was the last album with original bassist David Ellefson until his return to Megadeth in 2010. Additionally, mascot Vic Rattlehead appears on the cover of a Megadeth album for the first time since "Rust in Peace" (1990).

In 1999, Megadeth released their eighth studio album, "Risk". The album was noteworthy for being a drastic musical departure for the band, and the culmination of the band's increasing attempts for mainstream success throughout the 1990s, a trend starting with "Countdown to Extinction" (1992). "The World Needs a Hero" marks a stylistic transition towards the band's thrash metal roots. Furthermore, the album had been touted by the band as an "antidote" to "Risk" in a press release. However, the album has been noted by several music critics as still retaining some commercial feel from previous albums.

According to frontman Dave Mustaine, the album title refers to stereotypical rock stars. When asked about the matter, and an earlier comment about Axl Rose having killed the traditional rock star image, Mustaine explained that "People want heroes. Most bands look like average Joes, wearing gas-station shirts, have funky hair-dos and I think people wanna be able to go 'they may not be popular, but they're MY band.'" Mustaine went on to say that many of contemporary rock music groups looked and sounded the same, and that the music industry needed a hero. He then proceeded to contrast a perceived lack of image of then current music scenes with the image of 1980s metal bands like Iron Maiden and Judas Priest.

In another interview, Mustaine offered a more straightforward interpretation of the album title. Commenting on negative stories in the news, such as wars and natural disasters, Mustaine inferred that the world at that time was in need of a hero to solve various problems around the planet.

The album cover by Hugh Syme shows mascot Vic Rattlehead breaking out of Mustaine.

The album's lead single was "Moto Psycho", and a video was also made for this song. The song is about people who commute every day to work, spending a lot of time on the road. "Dread and the Fugitive Mind" was released on the "" compilation a year earlier, at the insistence of Megadeth's former label, Capitol Records. The album's opener, "Disconnect", is explained by Mustaine as being about living a double life and "the person I want you to think that I am and the person inside that I really know I am." "Coming Home" was only available on the Japanese pressing as a bonus track, but has since been released on the "Warchest" box set. Mustaine has stated that concept for "Promises" is "prejudiced relationships," such as those between a Catholic and a Protestant in Ireland, interracial and same-sex relationships, "it could be about a guy and a sheep for all I care. It just means that if we can't be together in this life, maybe we'll make it in the next."

When asked if "Recipe for Hate... Warhorse" was written about any particular person, Mustaine said that there were "a whole bunch of people that'd probably deserve that song," but didn't single out anyone in particular. "Silent Scorn" is an instrumental song which is often played over the sound system at concerts; this can be heard on the band's live album "Rude Awakening" (2002) right after the final song in the set, "Holy Wars... The Punishment Due". "Return to Hangar" is a sequel to "Hangar 18" from "Rust in Peace"; the captive aliens from the first song escape and kill their captors. On the live albums "Rude Awakening" and "" (2007) it is played back-to-back with "Hangar 18". The main riff and structure of "When", the album's closing number, is reminiscent of "Am I Evil?" by Diamond Head, which Mustaine said was intentional.

The album was released on May 15, 2001 in the United States and sold 61,000 copies in its first week of release, entering the "Billboard" 200 at number 16. The album sold another 25,000 copies in its second week, falling to number 59. The album also charted in Poland (#17), Germany (#36), Sweden (#38), and Switzerland (#55) as well. By December 2005, "The World Needs a Hero" had sold about 219,000 copies in the United States. Megadeth commenced a tour to promote the album on June 8, 2001 at Milton Keynes National Bowl in England, where they were featured alongside acts such as AC/DC, The Offspring, and Queens of the Stone Age. Following the breakup of the band in 2002, six of the album's songs appeared on "Still Alive... and Well?", a 2002 compilation combining studio tracks from "The World Needs a Hero", with six live tracks.

A remastered version of this album, along with "The System Has Failed", was re-issued on CD, vinyl and digital download on February 15, 2019. The remastered edition includes an additional bonus track "Coming Home" and revised album artwork.

"The World Needs a Hero" received mixed to positive reviews and was regarded as a "return to roots" by critics. Writing for AllMusic, reviewer Steve Huey opined that Mustaine "tries to conjure memories" of "Rust in Peace" and "Countdown to Extinction", but while comparing "Dread and the Fugitive Mind" to "Sweating Bullets" (from "Countdown to Extinction") said that much of the material "feels like rehashed Megadeth". Huey critiqued the production as still being "radio-friendly" and said because of that, the group "never quite kicks up the fury or flash of past glories". Neil Arnold of "Metal Forces" wrote that even though the album was "lacking the menace of the band’s earlier work", it was still a more accomplished effort than the previous record. He concluded that Megadeth were "clearly opting for melody over aggression", albeit rarely breaking into "thrash mode".

Meanwhile, reviewer Greg Pratt of "Brave Words & Bloody Knuckles" was more sympathetic towards the album. Pratt, after briefly critiquing the lack of a thrashy sound, positively compared the record to "Youthanasia" (1994) and "Countdown to Extinction" (1992). Additionally, he commented that even in the absence of longtime members Nick Menza and Marty Friedman, that the band still sounded good. Pratt reacted positively to a number of the album's songs, but cited "Recipe for Hate... Warhorse" as being the album's "most intense moment". Mike Stagno of Sputnikmusic had mixed feelings about the music on the record. While Stagno noted that the album was advertised as a return towards the band's roots, he explained that those who were hoping for an album in the style of the band's first four records would be disappointed. Stagno ultimately defined the album as "more of an all-out metal record".

"The Rolling Stone Album Guide" described the album as "sluggish" and "retrograde" and called it a "step back for the band". "Orlando Weekly"s John Engels felt that the void left by former guitarist Marty Friedman was successfully filled by Al Pitrelli. However, he noted that the album occasionally sounds repetitive, and criticized a number of songs for their "childish" lyrics. Friedman stated he was "a little disappoint[ed]" by the album. Friedman specifically singled out the album's cover for criticism, though he also commented that he thought that the music was "very well done".


Production and performance credits are adapted from the album liner notes, except where otherwise noted.


