The Sound of Girls Aloud: The Greatest Hits

The Sound of Girls Aloud: The Greatest Hits is the first greatest hits album of English-Irish girl group Girls Aloud. It was first released in the United Kingdom through a limited edition on 23 October 2006, while the standard version was released on 30 October 2006. "The Sound of Girls Aloud" features twelve of the group's singles, two of which reached number one in the UK. The album features three new tracks, with "Something Kinda Ooooh" and "I Think We're Alone Now" being released as singles and peaking inside the top five on the UK Singles Chart.

"The Sound of Girls Aloud" received positive reviews from critics, who praised it as a reflection of the group's success. The album entered the UK Albums Chart at number one, making it Girls Aloud's first album to do so. It also peaked at number nine on the Irish Albums Chart. In 2009, the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry (IFPI) recognised "The Sound of Girls Aloud" as one of the nine albums that year to sell at least 1 million units in Europe.

On 6 October 2006, Girls Aloud announced that they would release their first compilation album, following rumours that they would split after "Chemistry" (2005). A limited edition of "The Sound of Girls Aloud" was released in the United Kingdom on 23 October. The limited edition included a bonus disc with alternate edits of the group's previous singles "No Good Advice" and "Wake Me Up", and unreleased tracks, including a cover of "Sacred Trust", originally recorded by fellow "" contestants One True Voice. The bonus disc was also going to include a cover of Chris Isaak's "Wicked Game", however, the track did not make onto the final track listing.

The standard version of the compilation album was released the following week, on 30 October. The regular track listing includes three new tracks: "Something Kinda Ooooh", "Money" and a cover of Tommy James and the Shondells's 1967 single "I Think We're Alone Now". Originally, a cover of "What A Feeling" from the film "Flashdance" was included on the track list instead of "I Think We're Alone Now", but Girls Aloud contacted the record label three days before the album was manufactured to say they would rather record the Tommy James and the Shondells song. The group recorded the song the following morning and the album was mastered three days later. Apart from the new tracks, the album contains twelve of the group's previous singles, two of which reached number one in the UK: "Sound of the Underground" and "I'll Stand by You".

According to Irish bandmate Nadine Coyle, the first draft of the artwork included only the Union Jack, but she demanded the addition of the flag of Ireland. However, the flag appears upside-down on the cover, resembling the flag of Ivory Coast.

"The Sound of Girls Aloud" received positive reviews from critics. Talia Kraines of BBC Music called the album "a journey through the most exciting and daring pop music of recent times" and went on to add that "this reality band has surpassed all expectations," while Paul Scott of "Stylus Magazine" described it as "an irreverent party through the last 30 odd years of pop, taking inspiration from the most unexpected of places" and hailed Girls Aloud as "the finest singles band Britain [sic] has produced this decade." Allmusic reviewer Andy Kellman noted the album for making "an ideal introduction" to the group, and said that the three new songs would most likely "keep the group's remarkable streak of dominance afloat." Dan Cairns of "The Times" gave the album 4 out of 5 stars, stating that Girls Aloud's personality flows "through unimpeachable, sugar-rush pop singles" such as "Something Kinda Ooooh", "The Show" and "Sound of the Underground".

Pitchfork Media critic Tim Finney described the album as "a whirlwind trip through bizarre but lovable pop gadgetry that may leave the uninitiated reeling." He complimented the songs' "deathless hooks and multi-genre pyrotechnics" and noted that they are diverse, varying from different genres while embracing "elements of electroclash, big beat, and even skiffle." Leonie Cooper of "The Guardian" characterised the album as "slick ... near-faultless high-octane pop all the way"; however, she felt that the ballads were not really necessary, as "Girls Aloud sound far more exciting when they're simply having fun". In 2007, "The Guardian" included the greatest hits collection in their list of "1000 albums to hear before you die". Dorian Lynskey wrote, "Years from now, when someone wants to know how bold and brilliant mainstream British pop could get in the noughties, play them this."

"The Sound of Girls Aloud" became Girls Aloud's first album to debut at number one in the United Kingdom, and stayed on the UK Albums Chart for a total of 38 weeks. On 24 November 2007, Mark Sutherland of "Billboard" reported that the album had already sold a total of 767,000 units in the country. On the week ending 2 November 2006, the album debuted at number 13 on the Irish Albums Chart, rising to a new peak of number nine the following week. It was certified Platinum by the Irish Recorded Music Association, denoting shipments of 15,000 units in the country alone. On 29 January 2009, the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry (IFPI) recognised "The Sound of Girls Aloud" as one of the nine albums that year to sell at least 1 million units in Europe. As of 21 March 2013, the album has sold over 1,2 million units in Europe.

"Something Kinda Ooooh" was released on 16 October 2006 as the lead single from "The Sound of Girls Aloud", one week prior to the album's release. The track debuted at number five on the UK Singles Chart on download sales alone, before reaching its peak position at number three on the week ending 4 November 2006. The accompanying music video was directed by Stuart Gosling and produced by Jon Adams, and features the group "singing and dancing glamorously". "I Think We're Alone Now" was chosen as the second and final single from the album, being released on 18 December. The song peaked at number four on the UK Singles Chart during Christmas week. The music video was directed by Alex Hemming and Nick Collett, and portrays Girls Aloud in an attempt to rob a Las Vegas casino.

In 2007, Girls Aloud went on a tour to further promote the album. The announcement of the tour and the recording of their fourth studio album helped to stop rumours that the band were splitting up, which had surfaced due to the release of their greatest hits album. The show received mixed reviews from music critics, with Dave Simpson of "The Guardian" saying that the group "fare best when they are playing their own songs," while a critic for "Daily Mail" deemed it the group's "raunchiest tour ever [...] there was singing and dancing, but the stand out element of Girls Aloud's latest tour: sex appeal a-go-go."

All tracks were produced by Xenomania. Credits adapted from the liner notes of "The Sound of Girls Aloud: The Greatest Hits".

Credits adapted from Allmusic.


