Lindsay Lohan

Lindsay Dee Lohan (; born July 2, 1986) is an American actress, businesswoman, fashion designer, film producer, and singer. Born and raised in New York, Lohan was signed to Ford Models as a child. Having appeared as a regular on the television soap opera "Another World" at age 10, her breakthrough came in the Walt Disney Pictures film "The Parent Trap" (1998). The film's success led to appearances in a string of televised films for Disney Channel and the movie "Freaky Friday" (2003).

Lohan's work won her childhood stardom, and the sleeper hit "Mean Girls" (2004) affirmed her status as a teen idol. After starring in "" (2005), she quickly became the subject of intense media coverage following a series of personal struggles and legal trouble, as well as stints in rehabilitation facilities, which led to the loss of several roles and significantly impacted her career and public image. Thereafter, she focused on smaller, more mature roles in "A Prairie Home Companion" (2006), "Bobby" (2006), and "Chapter 27" (2007). In the 2010s, she appeared in films "Machete" (2010), "Liz & Dick" (2012) and "The Canyons" (2013), among others. Following a highly publicized interview with Oprah Winfrey, Lohan was subject of the OWN documentary series "Lindsay" (2014). Between 2014 and 2015, she made her stage debut in the London West End production of "Speed-the-Plow", in 2018, had a recurring role on the British series "Sick Note", and in 2019, began appearing in the MTV reality series "Lindsay Lohan's Beach Club".

Lohan came to prominence in music after signing with Casablanca Records and releasing two studio albums, "Speak" (2004) and "A Little More Personal (Raw)" (2005), which were certified platinum and gold respectively in the United States and saw the commercial success of the singles "Rumors" and "Over". She has also contributed vocals to the soundtracks of her acting projects. Lohan dabbled in fashion, beginning a line of her own titled "6126" and briefly serving as artistic advisor for Emmanuel Ungaro in 2009. In 2016, she opened the Lohan Nightclub in Athens, Greece, and in 2018, two Lohan Beach Houses in the Cyclades islands.

Lindsay Lohan was born on July 2, 1986, in The Bronx borough of New York City, and grew up in Merrick and Cold Spring Harbor on Long Island, New York. She is the eldest child of Dina and Michael Lohan. Her father, a former Wall Street trader, has been in trouble with the law on several occasions, while her mother is a former singer and dancer. Lohan has three younger siblings, all of whom have been models or actors: Michael Jr., who appeared with Lohan in "The Parent Trap," Aliana, known as "Ali," and Dakota "Cody" Lohan. Lohan is of Irish and Italian heritage, and she was raised as a Catholic. Her maternal antecedents were "well known Irish Catholic stalwarts" and her great-grandfather, John L. Sullivan, was a co-founder of the Pro-life Party on Long Island. Lohan attended Cold Spring Harbor High School and Sanford H. Calhoun High School, where she did well in science and mathematics, until grade 11, when she started homeschooling. Lohan is a natural red head.

Lohan's parents married in 1985, separated when Lindsay was three, and later reunited. They separated again in 2005 and finalized their divorce in 2007.

Lohan began her career as a child model with Ford Models at the age of three. She modeled for Calvin Klein Kids and Abercrombie, and appeared in over 60 television commercials for brands like Pizza Hut and Wendy's, as well as a Jell-O spot with Bill Cosby. By the age of 10, when Lohan played Alexandra "Alli" Fowler in the television soap opera "Another World," "Soap Opera Magazine" said she was already considered a show-business veteran.

Lohan remained in her role on "Another World" for a year, before leaving to star in Disney's 1998 family comedy "The Parent Trap," a remake of the 1961 movie. She played dual roles of twins, separated in infancy, who try to reunite their long-divorced parents, played by Dennis Quaid and Natasha Richardson. The film earned $92 million worldwide, and received largely positive reviews. Lohan received unanimous acclaim for her debut performance. Critic Kenneth Turan called Lohan "the soul of this film as much as Hayley Mills was of the original," going on to say that "she is more adept than her predecessor at creating two distinct personalities." The film won Lohan a Young Artist Award for best performance in a feature film as well as a three-film contract with Disney. At the age of 14, Lohan played Bette Midler's daughter in the pilot episode of the short-lived series "Bette," but she resigned her role when the production moved from New York to Los Angeles. She also starred in two Disney television movies: "Life-Size" alongside Tyra Banks in 2000, and "Get a Clue" in 2002.

In 2003, Lohan starred alongside Jamie Lee Curtis in the 2003 remake of Disney's family comedy "Freaky Friday," playing a mother and daughter who switch bodies and have to take on each other's roles. At Lohan's initiative, her character was rewritten and changed from a Goth style to be more mainstream. Her performance was once again met with significant praise. Critic Roger Ebert wrote that Lohan "has that Jodie Foster sort of seriousness and intent focus beneath her teenage persona." "Freaky Friday" earned Lohan the award for Breakthrough Performance at the 2004 MTV Movie Awards and, , it remained her most commercially successful film, earning $160 million worldwide as well as an 88 percent approval rating on Rotten Tomatoes.

In 2004, Lohan had lead roles in two major motion pictures. The first film, Disney's teen comedy "Confessions of a Teenage Drama Queen," earned a domestic box office total of $29 million, with Brandon Gray of Box Office Mojo commenting that it was "well above expectations as it was strictly for young girls." But the film did not meet with critical acclaim. Robert K. Elder of the "Chicago Tribune" wrote that "though still a promising star, Lohan will have to do a little penance before she's forgiven for "Confessions."" Her second lead role that year, in the teen comedy "Mean Girls," marked Lohan's first movie independent of Disney. Based in part on the non-fiction book "Queen Bees and Wannabes," the film stars Lohan as a previously homeschooled 16-year-old learning to navigate the social cliques of a public high school. It was a critical and commercial success, grossing $129 million worldwide and, according to Brandon Gray, "cementing her status as the new teen movie queen." Mick LaSalle from the "San Francisco Chronicle" wrote that "Lohan is sensitive and appealing, a solid locus for audience sympathy." David Rooney from "Variety" said that "Lohan displays plenty of charm, verve and deft comic timing." Lohan received four awards at the 2004 Teen Choice Awards for "Freaky Friday" and "Mean Girls," including Breakout Movie Star. "Mean Girls" also earned her two awards at the 2005 MTV Movie Awards.

With "Mean Girls," Lohan's public profile was raised significantly. "Vanity Fair" described how she became a household name. Paparazzi began following her and her love life and partying became frequent targets of gossip sites and the tabloid media. Following the film, which was scripted by former "Not Ready For Prime Time Actress" Tina Fey and featured several other veterans of "Saturday Night Live's" "Not Ready For Prime Time Company," Lohan hosted the show three times between 2004 and 2006. In 2004, when Lohan was 17, she became the youngest host of the MTV Movie Awards and in 2006 she hosted the 2006 World Music Awards.

Lohan returned to Disney in 2005, starring in the comedy "," the fifth film in the series with the anthropomorphic car Herbie. "Fully Loaded" earned $144 million worldwide, but it received mixed reviews. Stephen Holden of "The New York Times" called Lohan "a genuine star who ... seems completely at home on the screen", while James Berardinelli wrote that "as bright a starlet as she may be, Lohan ends up playing second fiddle to the car." In 2005, Lohan became the first person to have a My Scene celebrity doll released by Mattel. She also voiced herself in the animated direct-to-DVD film "", based on the series of dolls.

Lohan's next widely released film, the romantic comedy "Just My Luck," opened in May 2006 and, according to "Variety", earned her over $7 million. The opening weekend box office takings of $5.7 million "broke lead actress Lindsay Lohan's winning streak" according to Brandon Gray. The film received poor reviews and earned Lohan her first Golden Raspberry nomination for Worst Actress. Following "Just My Luck," Lohan focused on smaller roles in more mature, independent movies. Robert Altman's ensemble comedy "A Prairie Home Companion," based on humorist Garrison Keillor's works, in which Lohan co-stars with Meryl Streep and Lily Tomlin, had a limited release in June 2006. Peter Travers wrote for "Rolling Stone" that "Lohan rises to the occasion, delivering a rock-the-house version of 'Frankie and Johnny.'" Co-star Streep said of Lohan's acting: "She's in command of the art form" and "completely, visibly living in front of the camera." The Emilio Estevez ensemble drama "Bobby," about the hours leading up to the Robert F. Kennedy assassination, was released in theaters in November 2006. Lohan received favorable comments for her performance, particularly a scene alongside Sharon Stone. As part of the "Bobby" ensemble cast, Lohan was nominated for a Screen Actors Guild Award.

Lohan's next appearance was in "Chapter 27" as a John Lennon fan who befriends Mark David Chapman, played by Jared Leto, on the day he murders Lennon. Filming finished in early 2006, but the film was not released until March 2008 due to difficulties in finding a distributor. In May 2007, the drama "Georgia Rule" was released. In the film, Lohan portrays an out-of-control teenager whose mother (Felicity Huffman) brings her to the house of her own estranged mother (Jane Fonda). Owen Gleiberman of "Entertainment Weekly" wrote that "Lohan hits a true note of spiteful princess narcissism." During filming in 2006, Lohan was hospitalized, her representative saying "she was overheated and dehydrated." In a letter that was made public, studio executive James G. Robinson called Lohan "irresponsible and unprofessional." He mentioned "various late arrivals and absences from the set" and said that "we are well aware that your ongoing all night heavy partying is the real reason for your so-called 'exhaustion.'" In 2007, Lohan was cast in the film "Poor Things,"<ref name="AP/CBS"></ref> which she ultimately lost.
In early January 2007, production on the film "I Know Who Killed Me" was put on hold when Lohan underwent appendix surgery. While Lohan was in rehab, she continued shooting the film, returning to the facility at night. Shortly thereafter, Lohan withdrew from a film adaptation of Oscar Wilde's "A Woman of No Importance," her publicist stating that Lohan needed to "focus on getting better." Lohan was replaced in "The Edge of Love" in April 2007, shortly before filming was to begin, with the director citing "insurance reasons" and Lohan later explaining that she "was going through a really bad time then."In the wake of her second DUI arrest, Lohan withdrew from a scheduled appearance on "The Tonight Show with Jay Leno" in which she had been due to promote "I Know Who Killed Me," a low-budget psychological horror-thriller in which she stars as a stripper with a dual personality. The film premiered in July 2007 to what "Entertainment Weekly" called "an abysmal $3.5 million." It earned Lohan dual Golden Raspberry awards for Worst Actress, with Lohan coming first and second, tying with herself. Hollywood executives and industry insiders commented that it would be difficult for Lohan to find employment until she could prove that she was sober and reliable, citing possible issues with securing insurance.

In May 2008, Lohan made her first screen appearance since "I Know Who Killed Me," on ABC's television series "Ugly Betty". She guest starred in four episodes as Kimmie Keegan, an old schoolmate of the protagonist Betty Suarez. In the comedy "Labor Pains," Lohan plays a woman who pretends to be pregnant. During the shoot, Lohan's manager worked with the paparazzi to encourage the media to show her work, as opposed to partying. It was originally planned for a theatrical release, but instead appeared as a TV movie on the ABC Family cable channel in July 2009, "a setback for the star" according to "Variety." The premiere received 2.1 million viewers, "better-than-average" for the channel according to E! Online. Alessandra Stanley of "The New York Times" wrote that "this is not a triumphant return of a prodigal child star. ... ["Labor Pains"] never shakes free of the heavy baggage Ms. Lohan brings to the role." Lohan was a guest judge on US TV style contest "Project Runway" sixth-season premiere episode, which aired in August 2009.

Lohan narrated and presented the British television documentary "Lindsay Lohan's Indian Journey," about human trafficking in India. It was filmed during a week in India in December 2009, and transmitted on BBC Three in April 2010. The BBC was criticized for having hired Lohan, and while reviewers called the documentary compelling, they also found Lohan's presence to be odd and distracting. Lohan said: "I hope my presence in India will bring awareness to the really important issues raised in making this film." In April 2010, Lohan was let go from the film "The Other Side" where she had been set to star, with the director saying she was "not bankable."

In June 2010, Lohan was the subject of a fashion shoot in the photographer docu-series "Double Exposure" on Bravo. Robert Rodriguez's action exploitation film "Machete" opened in September 2010. In the film, Lohan's character takes drugs, is naked in much of her appearance, and later dons a nun's habit while toting a machine gun. Its critical reviews were mixed. "The Washington Post" described her character as "a campier, trampier version of herself – or at least her tabloid image." Premiere.com said she was "terrible" while "Variety" called it "her best work in some time." Because of her rehabilitation and legal engagements, Lohan did not participate in promotion of the movie. Lohan filmed a sketch where she is dressed as Marilyn Monroe for "Inappropriate Comedy" in 2010. The film had issues finding a distributor and was not released until 2013, when it was met with poor box office and critical reception. Lohan appeared on the October 2010 cover of "Vanity Fair". She told the magazine: "I want my career back" and "I know that I'm a damn good actress."

Lohan had not appeared on "Saturday Night Live" since 2006, when she hosted the show for the fourth time in March 2012. Her appearance received mixed to negative reviews. Critics appreciated the self-deprecating references to her personal troubles, but also commented that she largely played a supporting role. The episode had the second highest ratings of the season with 7.4 million viewers. In May 2012, Lohan appeared briefly, as a celebrity judge, on the television series "Glee," in the episode "Nationals." Lohan stars as a surfer in the art film "First Point" by artist Richard Phillips. It debuted at Art Basel in June 2012 and features a score by Thomas Bangalter from Daft Punk. Comments from critics on Lohan's work were mixed.

Lohan starred as Elizabeth Taylor in the biographical made-for-TV movie "Liz & Dick", which premiered on the Lifetime cable channel in November 2012. Reviews of Lohan's performance were largely, but not unanimously, negative. "The Hollywood Reporter" said she was "woeful" while "Variety" called her "adequate." "Entertainment Weekly" described the premiere ratings of 3.5 millions as "a little soft." During the production, paramedics were called to Lohan's hotel room, treating her for exhaustion and dehydration. In April 2013, the horror comedy "Scary Movie 5" was released, where Lohan appears as herself alongside Charlie Sheen in the opening sketch. While the movie itself was panned by critics, a few reviewers found Lohan's and Sheen's to be one of the better scenes. Lohan also guest-starred as herself in an April 2013 episode of Sheen's comedy series "Anger Management."

In August 2013, just days after Lohan left rehab, "The Canyons" was released, an independent erotic thriller directed by Paul Schrader and written by Bret Easton Ellis. It was made on a low budget, most of which was gathered through online fund raiser Kickstarter. Lohan received $100 a day and a share of the profits, and she was also credited as a co-producer. "The New York Times Magazine" described Lohan as difficult to work with, and the shoot as fraught with conflict between Lohan and Schrader. Lohan and her co-star, adult-film actor James Deen, portray an actress and a producer in a volatile relationship. Reviews for the film were generally poor, but several critics praised Lohan's performance. "The New Yorker" said she was "overwrought and unfocused" while "Variety" called her "very affecting" and "Salon" described her as "almost incandescent." The same month Lohan filled in for Chelsea Handler as host of the cable talk show "Chelsea Lately." She received mostly positive reviews for her appearance and the show garnered its best ratings of the year.

The 8-part docu-series "Lindsay" was transmitted in March and April 2014 on Oprah Winfrey's OWN cable network. The series followed Lohan's life and work as she moved to New York City after leaving rehab. In the final episode, Lohan said that she had had a miscarriage which had interrupted filming of the series. The premiere had 693,000 viewers, described as "so-so" by "The Hollywood Reporter." The ratings then slipped and the finale only had 406,000 viewers. "New York Daily News" called the series "surprisingly routine," "Variety" described it as boring, while Liz Smith said it was "compelling" and "usually painful to watch." In April 2014, Lohan guest-starred in an episode of the CBS sitcom "2 Broke Girls."

Lohan made her stage debut in October 2014, starring in the London West End production of David Mamet's "Speed-the-Plow," a satire about the movie business. She portrayed Karen, the secretary of a Hollywood executive, in a role originally played by Madonna. Reviews of Lohan's performance were mixed, with the Associated Press describing critical reception overall as "lukewarm." "The Stage" said she was "out of her league" while "The Times" wrote that she "can act a bit" and "The Guardian" said she "holds the stage with ease." In July 2018, the second season of "Sick Note" —in which Lohan has a recurring role— premiered on Sky One.

Lohan began writing the tracks on her album in April 2004. "I write a lot of lyrics and I'm involved in the producing process, because it's like, if I'm singing it, I want it to be something that I can relate to," Lohan said. "I'm just trying to feel it out and see where it goes. I'm playing guitar and
I also love to dance, so [the music will be] somewhere along the lines of hip-hop and rock."

Lohan's debut album, "Speak," was released in the United States on December 7, 2004. The album was the first high-seller from Casablanca Records in several years, selling 1,000,000 units in the United States. The album received mostly negative reviews, with critics commenting that Lohan "isn't a bad singer, but not an extraordinary singer either." In the United States, the album peaked at number four on the "Billboard" 200, selling 261,762 copies in its first week. In Germany the album debuted at the #53 position and took four weeks to complete its chart run. The first two singles from "Speak," "Rumors" and "Over," were both successes, with "Over" topping the Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles where it stayed for three weeks. The song also did well internationally in countries such as Australia, Ireland, and the United Kingdom. "Rumors" peaked at #6 on the Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles chart and also did well in Australia and Germany, where it reached #14. The music video for "Rumors" was nominated for "Best Pop Video" at the 2005 MTV Video Music Awards. Both songs received heavy airplay on MTV's "Total Request Live." The final single, "First," was released to help promote Lohan's film, "." The song earned small success in Australia and Germany. Lohan promoted the album by performing the songs in a number of live appearances. A tour in Taiwan was planned, but later scrapped.

Lohan's second album, "A Little More Personal (Raw)," was released in December 2005. It peaked at number 20 on the Billboard 200 chart, and was eventually certified Gold. Lohan co-wrote most of the songs on the album, which received a mixed critical response. "Slant Magazine" called it "contrived ... for all the so-called weighty subject matter, there's not much meat on these bones." Lohan herself directed the music video for the album's only single, "Confessions of a Broken Heart (Daughter to Father)," which features her sister Ali Lohan. The video is a dramatization of the pain Lohan said her family suffered at the hands of her father. It was her first song to chart on the ""Billboard" Hot 100," peaking at number 57.

Emilio Estefan and his wife, Gloria Estefan, signed Lohan to a five-album production deal in September 2002. Lohan landed the role as the daughter in Disney's remake, "Freaky Friday," also that month, which required her to learn how to play the guitar and to sing. Lohan recorded a song for the film, "Ultimate," which was released to Radio Disney to help promote the film. The song peaked at #18 on Radio Disney's Top 30. Lohan announced that the song was separate from her singing career since many teen idols such as Hilary Duff and Raven-Symoné were expanding their careers from acting to singing. In 2003, Lohan recorded four songs that were released for the soundtrack to Lohan's film, "Confessions of a Teenage Drama Queen", including a Radio Disney hit, "Drama Queen (That Girl)."

She had begun working with Diane Warren and Randy Jackson, who were going to help write and produce her album. Diane Warren wrote the song, "I Decide," for Lohan which was originally going to be on her album. When Lohan decided not to collaborate with Warren and Jackson, "I Decide" was instead released on "" and on to Radio Disney.

Following a switch to Universal Motown, Lohan began working on a third album, tentatively titled "Spirit in the Dark," in late 2007. In May 2008, the single "Bossy" was released onto digital outlets, which reached number one on the US "Billboard" Hot Dance Club Play chart. The single was meant to serve as the lead single from the album. Later that year, Lohan said that work on the album had stalled and that she wanted to avoid the stress of working on movies and music at the same time.

In 2015, the English band Duran Duran announced that Lohan had been featured on the song "Danceophobia" from their upcoming fourteenth studio album, "Paper Gods."

Lohan has been the face of Jill Stuart, Miu Miu, and, as well as the 2008 Visa Swap British fashion campaign. She was also the face of Italian clothing company Fornarina for its Spring–Summer 2009 campaign. Lohan has a long-lasting fascination with Marilyn Monroe going back to when she saw "Niagara" during "The Parent Trap" shoot. In the 2008 "Spring Fashion" edition of "New York" magazine, Lohan re-created Monroe's final photo shoot, known as "The Last Sitting," including nudity, saying that the photo shoot was "an honor." "The New York Times" critic Ginia Bellafante found it disturbing, saying "the pictures ask viewers to engage in a kind of mock necrophilia. ... [and] the photographs bear none of Monroe's fragility."

In 2008, Lohan launched a clothes line, whose name "6126" was designed to represent Monroe's birth date (June 1, 1926). The line started with leggings, before expanding to a full collection, covering 280 pieces . In January 2009, Lohan appeared as a guest judge on "Project Runway". In September 2009, Lohan became an artistic adviser for the French fashion house Emanuel Ungaro. A collection by designer Estrella Archs with Lohan as adviser was presented in October, receiving a "disastrous" reception, according to "Entertainment Weekly" and "New York." Lohan left the company in March 2010. Lohan appeared in the January–February 2012 issue of "Playboy" magazine, in a shoot inspired by a nude pictorial of Marilyn Monroe from the first issue of the magazine. Editor Hugh Hefner said Lohan's issue was "breaking sales records."

In early 2018, Lohan announced plans on developing a makeup brand separate from her fashion brand and stated that it was still in its early stages of development.

In December 2014, the free-to-play video game app "Lindsay Lohan's The Price of Fame" was released for the iOS and Android operating systems. "Polygon" said it was "funny, trashy and surprisingly self-aware" while Vulture called it "a crappy knockoff of "Kim Kardashian: Hollywood"".

In June 2017, Lohan announced she was starting a lifestyle site called Preemium, which subscribers could access for $2.99 a month.

In October 2016, Lohan opened her first nightclub, in collaboration with her ex-business partner Dennis Papageorgiou, named "Lohan Nightclub", in Athens, Greece. In May 2018, she opened a resort on the Greek island Mykonos called "Lohan Beach House Mykonos" and later her second resort in Ialisos Beach, Rhodes, called "Lohan Beach House Rhodes". In July 2018, "People" magazine revealed that Lohan had signed on to star in an MTV reality series, "Lindsay Lohan's Beach Club" focusing on the Mykonos Beach House and her future career and business ventures. The series premiered on January 8, 2019 on MTV.

Following "Mean Girls," Lohan spent several years living out of hotels in Los Angeles, of which two years were spent at the Chateau Marmont. In late 2007, after settling down in a more permanent residence, she explained that she "didn't want to be alone" but that "it wasn't a way of life ... not very consistent." She had a series of car accidents that were widely reported, in August 2004, October 2005, and November 2006, when she suffered minor injuries because a paparazzo who was following her for a photograph hit her car.

In July 2007, Lohan's home was burgled by the Bling Ring, a group of fashion-motivated burglars whose ringleader considered Lohan to be their ultimate conquest. Video surveillance of the burglary recorded at Lohan's home played a large role in breaking the case.

Speaking about her sexual orientation, Lohan said that she was not a lesbian. When asked if she was bisexual in 2008, she responded "Maybe. Yeah," adding, "I don't want to classify myself." However, in a 2013 interview, she said, "I know I'm straight. I have made out with girls before, and I had a relationship with a girl. ... I think I was looking for something different."

In April 2016, Lohan was studying Islam and considered converting.

In October 2017, Lohan received scrutiny for defending Harvey Weinstein, whom she worked with on several films, on Instagram and saying that his wife Georgina Chapman should stay with him. Weinstein had been accused of sexual harassment and sexual assault. Lohan later clarified stating, "I am saddened to hear about the allegations against my former colleague Harvey Weinstein. As someone who has lived their life in the public eye, I feel that allegations should always be made to the authorities and not played out in the media."

In September 2018, Lohan garnered controversy and scrutiny after she livestreamed herself attempting to lead away a homeless woman's children on Instagram Live. In the video, she accuses the woman of child trafficking and dubs the family 'Syrian refugee[s]'. The situation has been regarded as an attempted kidnapping, and suspicions have arisen that Lohan was intoxicated.

Lohan began dating actor Wilmer Valderrama in 2004. She also guest-starred in an episode of "That '70s Show", where Valderrama was a regular. After their break-up, Lohan wrote her second single, "Over", about the experience. Lohan dated Hard Rock Cafe heir Harry Morton in 2006. Lohan dated DJ Samantha Ronson in 2008 and 2009. She co-hosted club events with Ronson and accompanied her when she was DJ-ing. In April 2009, following her breakup with Ronson, Lohan appeared in a dating video spoof on the comedy website Funny or Die. It was viewed 2.7 million times in the first week and received favorable comments from the media. , her love interest and fiancé was London based Russian millionaire Egor Tarabasov, owner of the real estate agency Home House Estates and son of Dmitry Tarabasov. They reportedly broke up in mid 2017 with Lindsay accusing Egor of abuse and him accusing her of stealing £24,000 worth of his belongings.

Lohan spoke about her turbulent childhood in 2007, the same year her parents finalized their divorce: "I feel like a second parent in the sense that I helped raise my family...I was put between my mother and father a lot." Despite the conflicts, Lohan spoke very fondly of her family. However, in 2007, 2008, and 2009 she admitted that she had cut off contact with her father, describing his behavior as unpredictable and hard to deal with.

During the 2008 US presidential campaign, Lohan offered her services to Barack Obama's Democratic election effort, but was declined. In a blog post, Lohan criticized the media and then Republican Vice Presidential candidate Sarah Palin for not focusing on policy, and attacked Palin's positions on homosexuality, birth control and abortion. Lohan had previously expressed an interest in going to Iraq, during the Iraq War in 2006, on a USO tour with Hillary Clinton. In the 2012 presidential election, Lohan supported Republican candidate Mitt Romney, something that prompted ABC News to call her a "political turncoat". Only weeks later, she tweeted words supportive of Obama.

By the age of 21, Lohan started to attend Alcoholics Anonymous meetings, and had become a prominent fixture of the Los Angeles late-night scene, where alcohol and other drugs were often present and on hand for her. By 2007, her lifestyle had "caught up" with her, she once noted, as she started to receive more attention for her late-night persona than for her film work, and faced the beginning of what would be a long series of run-ins with the law. She described herself as an "addict" in her 2014 interview with Oprah, stating that alcohol was a gateway drug to other things for her. She also admitted to using cocaine "10 to 15 times", explaining that it "allowed [her] to drink more".

Her January 2007 admittance into a rehab center marked the first of six court-ordered rehab stints in a span of six years; she had spent over 250 days in rehabilitation by 2014. In January 2007, Lohan admitted herself to the Wonderland Center rehabilitation facility for a 30-day stay. In May, she entered the Promises Treatment Center rehabilitation facility where she stayed for 45 days. In July, she entered the Cirque Lodge Treatment Center in Sundance, Utah for a third stint at rehabilitation in the year, staying for three months until her discharge in October. In August 2010, Lohan entered an inpatient rehabilitation facility, from where she was released after only 23 days, and in October, she entered the Betty Ford Center, a drug and alcohol treatment center, where she remained on court order for three months until early January 2011. Between May and July 2013, Lohan spent 90 days in rehabilitation.

In May 2007, Lohan was arrested on a charge of driving under the influence of alcohol (DUI). In July, less than two weeks out of rehab, Lohan was arrested a second time on charges of possession of cocaine, driving under the influence and driving with a suspended license. In August, Lohan pleaded guilty to misdemeanor cocaine use and driving under the influence and was sentenced to an alcohol education program, community service, one day in jail, and was given three years probation. Lohan released a statement in which she said "it is clear to me that my life has become completely unmanageable because I am addicted to alcohol and drugs." In November, Lohan served 84 minutes in jail. A sheriff spokesman cited overcrowding and the nonviolent nature of the crime as reasons for the reduced sentence.

In October 2009, Lohan's DUI probation was extended by an additional year, following several instances in which she failed to attend the court-ordered substance abuse treatment classes. In May 2010, Lohan traveled to the Cannes Film Festival to promote the biographical drama "Inferno." She was set to star as the lead, adult-film performer Linda Lovelace, but was later replaced while in court mandated rehab. Because she was in Cannes, Lohan missed a mandatory DUI progress hearing. A bench warrant was issued for her arrest which was rescinded after she posted bail. A judge determined that Lohan had violated the terms of her probation by missing several mandatory classes and meetings. She was sentenced to 90 days in jail, followed by 90 days of inpatient rehab treatment. However, Lohan served only 14 days of the jail sentence, due to overcrowding.

In September 2010, Lohan's probation was revoked following a failed drug test. She spent part of the day in jail before being released on bail. In February 2011, Lohan was charged with the theft of a necklace reported stolen from a jewelry store the month before. She was sentenced to community service and 120 days in jail for misdemeanor theft and probation violation, to which she pleaded no contest. Due to jail overcrowding, Lohan served the sentence under house confinement, wearing a tracking ankle monitor for 35 days. In November, Lohan was found to have violated the terms of her probation by failing to perform the required community service. She was sentenced to additional community service and 30 days in jail, of which she served less than 5 hours due to overcrowding.

On way to the "Liz & Dick" set in June 2012, Lohan was in a car accident, where she sustained minor injuries and which caused a delay in production. In March 2013, Lohan pleaded no contest to misdemeanor charges stemming from the June 2012 car accident; reckless driving and providing false information to a police officer. She was sentenced to community service, psychotherapy and lockdown rehabilitation. Her probation was also extended until May 2015, when a judge ended it after she completed the community service making it the first time in nearly 8 years that she was probation free.

After beginning her acting career as a child actor in the early 1990s, Lohan, at age 11, made her film debut in Disney's successful remake of "The Parent Trap" (1998). "Freaky Friday" (2003) remains her highest-grossing film, while "Mean Girls" (2004), both a critical and commercial success, became a cult classic. Her career faced many interruptions from legal and personal troubles during the late 2000s and early 2010s, but she has still been able to appear in 26 films (including 6 as a personality), 12 television appearances, 1 play and 5 music videos. Her most notable films include:





