Evermore (band)

Evermore are a band originally from Feilding, New Zealand, now based in Melbourne, Australia. The band consists of brothers Jon (guitar, vocals, album production), Peter (keyboards, bass, vocals) and Dann Hume (drums, guitar, vocals). The band have released three platinum-selling albums, "Dreams" (2004), "Real Life" (2006) and "" (2009) and a self-titled greatest hits album including three new songs. They have been nominated for seven ARIA Awards, and have won two Vodafone New Zealand Music Awards. They have won the APRA Silver Scroll songwriting award, and the Channel V Oz Artist of the Year Award.

Evermore started in 1999 consisting of brothers Jon, Peter, and Dann. Jon was born in Australia, while Peter and Dann were born in New Zealand. The three were raised and home-schooled in Feilding, Manawatu. The brothers were introduced to music at a young age by their parents, and frequently listened to their record collection. The name "Evermore" was taken from the Led Zeppelin song "The Battle of Evermore" in 1999. Jon says the trio's parents were highly supportive of them taking up music, stating "they always wanted us to do something creative...Nothing was too risky."
In 2012, youngest brother Dann took a break from playing drums with Evermore to pursue his own singing and production career. He supported the Lisa Mitchell tour in 2012 as Danco.

In 2000, Evermore entered Rockquest with Richard Higham, who played bass guitar in the band at the time. The band won the competition, and used the prize money to help fund their studio, Red Sky Studio.

Evermore's first EP, "Slipping Away", was released on 1 December 2002, with only 300 copies pressed. However, the EP received regular airplay on Triple J, and was thus able to garner the band some attention. Their next EP, the "Oil & Water EP", released 13 January 2003 resulted in the band's first concert tour, again supported by Triple J. "My Own Way EP", the band's third EP, was released on 15 September 2003, after which the band toured with American band Brad.

In August 2003, Evermore appeared on the cover of "New Zealand Musician" in New Zealand, following success in "Project NZM" – a promotion by radio station ZM to gain awareness for up-and-coming bands.

"Dreams", Evermore's debut studio album, was released on 27 September 2004 in Australia. It peaked at number fifteen on the ARIA albums chart, and number thirty on the RIANZ albums chart. Three singles were released from the album; "It's Too Late", "For One Day", and "Come to Nothing"; which charted moderately.
The three singles were featured on the New Zealand and Australian promos of "The O.C.", with "It's Too Late" ultimately appearing on the show. A remixed version of "It's Too Late" with Dirty South, titled "It's Too Late (Ride on)", was also released, and appeared on numerous compilation albums.

On "Dreams", Evermore worked with producer Barrett Jones (Nirvana, Foo Fighters, Whiskeytown), who was introduced to the band by Brad on their past tour. The band's Red Sky Studio in Feilding was flooded in February 2004, so the band relocated to Seattle for recording.

"Dreams" differed to Evermore's earlier "retro-sounding, riff-based pop-rock" works, and instead contained a more "spacious" sound according to Jon. He said he drew inspiration and was influenced by Silverchair and Muse, as well as Pink Floyd. Jon also noted that the band initially wanted to create a concept album, but stated that "we sort of had to tone it back a bit, because we wanted to make a double album". Soundgenerator.com reviewer Eleanor Goodman described "Dreams" as "clear rather than grungy, soulful rather than angsty".

The band released "The Lakeside Sessions Vol. 1", an iTunes-exclusive live acoustic EP on 20 December 2005.

Evermore's second album, "Real Life", was released on 8 July 2006 by Warner. The album peaked at number five on the ARIA albums chart and number two on the RIANZ albums chart, spending over half a year in both. It was also certified platinum in Australia. Four singles were released from the album; "Running", "Light Surrounding You", "Unbreakable", and "Never Let You Go". Of these, "Light Surrounding You" charted best, and became Evermore's first number one single.

"Real Life" was initially recorded on the Central Coast of New South Wales, where the band spent three months. Production moved to Easton, Maryland for an additional three months, and continued recording with producer John Alagía. Following recording and production, the album was mixed by Tom Lord-Alge (blink-182).

The album's release was followed by a tour of New Zealand and Australia that began in September and October with support acts Bob Evans, The Vagrant City Scandal. In June 2006, Evermore opened for another band who trace their own start a decade ago, also coming from New Zealand to gain world fame in Melbourne. Thus, they found themselves as the opening act for Split Enz at the Rod Laver Arena in Melbourne. On 17 November 2006, Evermore performed at a charity concert: the Make Poverty History Concert in Melbourne, playing "Stand by Me". Early in 2007, the band played at the Big Day Out, as well as at the 21st Australian Scout Jamboree and on 29 April they appeared at the 2007 MTV Australia Video Music Awards to perform "Light Surrounding You".

The band's third album "" was released on 20 March 2009 and debuted at number 14 on the ARIA albums chart. The album was preceded by two singles; the first, "Between The Lines", was released as a free download from the band's website on 10 November 2008. The second single, "Hey Boys and Girls (Truth of the World pt.2)", was released on 3 February 2009. It peaked at number 5 on the New Zealand charts and number 4 on the Australian charts. Their single "Can You Hear Me?" was released to radio on 11 May, but did not chart.

"Truth of the World" is a concept album about trash media, political propaganda, advertising and infotainment. It was recorded at the band's own studio in Melbourne over a period of 18 months.

In July and August 2009, Evermore supported Pink during the Funhouse Tour in Ireland and on the second half of the Australian leg of the tour. After the successful Australian tours in support of "Truth of the World: Welcome to the Show" and support of the pop artist Pink on her Funhouse Tour, the singer was impressed enough to invite the band to perform as main support act for her upcoming European tour. The band released a self-titled greatest hits album on 12 March in Australia and New Zealand, which included the single "Underground", which did not chart.

After completing a major tour of Australia and Europe as opening act for superstar Pink early 2010, the band took some time out of the spot light, stating on their official website and blog that they were currently writing and recording their next studio album. The band took 2011 as an opportunity to build a new recording studio, now named, The Stables Recording Studio, in regional Victoria, using it to record new material. In early 2011 the band took a portable recording studio on an elaborate round world writing trip.

The result of this was on the 12 October 2012 when they released their fourth studio album Follow the Sun. The first single, the title track 'Follow the Sun', was used by HBO America in a major end of year promotion for the station and also featured in the worldwide trailer for DreamWorks Animation's The Croods. 
Two Australia headline tours were to follow in 2012 and 2013 as well as support for Maroon 5's Australian leg of their worldwide Overexposed Tour and Matchbox Twenty Australian North Tour with INXS.


Studio albums

Extended plays
Compilation albums





